<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
<head>
<title>Additional Material</title>
</head>
<body epub:type="backmatter">
<h2 epub:type="title">Preface</h2>
<p>WHAT is a Saga ? A Saga is a story, or telling in prose, sometimes mixed with verse. There are many kinds of Sagas, of all degrees of truth. There are the mythical Sagas, in which the wondrous deeds of heroes of old time, half gods and half men, as Sigurd and Ragnar, are told asthey were handed down from father to son in the traditions of the Northern race. Then there are Sagas recounting the history of the kings of Norway and other countries, of the great line of Orkney Jarls, and of the chiefswho ruled in Faroe. These are all more or less trustworthy, and, in general, far worthier of belief than muchthat passes for the early history of other races. Again, there are Sagas relating to Iceland, narrating the lives, andfeuds, and ends of mighty chiefs, the heads of the greatfamilies which dwelt in this or that district of the island. These were told by men who lived on the very spot, andtold with a minuteness and exactness, as to time andplace, that will bear the strictest examination. Such a</p>
<p>Saga is that of Njal, which we now lay before our readersin an English garb. Of all the Sagas relating to Iceland, this tragic story bears away the palm for truthfulnessand beauty. To use the words of one well qualified tojudge, it is, as compared with all similar compositions, as gold to brass.* Like all the Sagas which relate tothe same period of Icelandic story, Njala† was not writtendown till about 100 years after the events which aredescribed in it had happened. In the meantime, it washanded down by word of mouth, told from Althing to Althing, at Spring Thing, and Autumn Leet, at allgreat gatherings of the people, and over many a fireside, on sea strand or river bank, or up among the dales andhills, by men who had learnt the sad story of Njal'sfate, and who could tell of Gunnar's peerlessness and Hallgerda's infamy, of Bergthora's helpfulness, of Skarphedinn's hastiness, of Flosi's foul deed, and Kari's sternrevenge. We may be sure that as soon as each eventrecorded in the Saga occurred, it was told and talkedabout as matter of history, and when at last the wholestory was unfolded and took shape, and centred round</p>
<p>Njal, that it was handed down from father to son, astruthfully and faithfully as could ever be the casewith any public or notorious matter in local history. But it is not on Njala alone that we have to rely forour evidence of its genuineness. There are manyother Sagas relating to the same period, and handeddown in like manner, in which the actors in our Saga are incidentally mentioned by name, and in whichthe deeds recorded of them are corroborated. They arementioned also in songs and Annals, the latter beingthe earliest written records which belong to the history of the island, while the former were more easilyremembered, from the construction of the verse. Muchpasses for history in other lands on far slighter grounds, and many a story in Thucydides or Tacitus, or even in Clarendon or Hume, is believed on evidence not onetenth part so trustworthy as that which supports thenarratives of these Icelandic story-tellers of the eleventhcentury. That with occurrences of undoubted truth, and minute particularity as to time and place, as todates and distance, are intermingled wild superstitionson several occasions, will startle no reader of the smallestjudgment. All ages, our own not excepted, have theirsuperstitions, and to suppose that a story told in theeleventh century,—when phantoms, and ghosts, and</p>
<p>wraiths, were implicitly believed in, and when dreams, and warnings, and tokens, were part of every man'screed,—should be wanting in these marks of genuineness, is simply to require that one great proof of itstruthfulness should be wanting, and that, in order to suitthe spirit of our age, it should lack something whichwas part and parcel of popular belief in the age to whichit belonged. To a thoughtful mind, therefore, such storiesas that of Swan's witchcraft, Gunnar's song in hiscairn, the Wolf's ride before the Burning, Flosi's dream, the signs and tokens before Brian's battle, and even Njal's weird foresight, on which the whole story hangs, will be regarded as proofs rather for than against itsgenuineness.*</p>
<p>But it is an old saying, that a story never loses intelling, and so we may expect it must have been withthis story. For the facts which the Saga-teller relatedhe was bound to follow the narrations of those whohad gone before him, and if he swerved to or fro in</p>
<p>this respect, public opinion and notorious fame wasthere to check and contradict him.* But the way inwhich he told the facts was his own, and thus itcomes that some Sagas are better told than others, as the feeling and power of the narrator were abovethose of others. To tell a story truthfully, was whatwas looked for from all men in those days; butto tell it properly and gracefully, and so to clothethe facts in fitting diction, was given to few, and of thosefew the Saga teller who first threw Njala into its presentshape, was one of the first and foremost.</p>
<p>With the change of faith and conversion of the Icelanders to Christianity, writing, and the materials forwriting, first came into the land, about the year 1000. There is no proof that the earlier or Runic alphabet, whichexisted in heathen times, was ever used for any otherpurposes than those of simple monumental inscriptions, or of short legends on weapons or sacrificial vessels, orhorns and drinking cups. But with the Roman alphabetcame not only a readier means of expressing thought, but also a class of men who were wont thus to expressthemselves. While the open nature of the Northman’slife called upon him for words rather than writing, andeven in trials, rather for oral than written testimony ; while the heathen priest’s memory was burdened with afew solemn forms of oaths taken in the temples, andsome short prayers and toasts recited and uttered atsacrifices and feasts, the Christian monk, with his massbook and ritual, was thrown, by the very nature of hisservices, and by solitude of his cell, into fellowship withletters, and taught to express himself by writing ratherthan by speech. Thus, during the whole of the eleventhcentury, two separate systems of teaching existed in Iceland. Oral teaching, as regarded the traditions andhistory of the country by the mouths of the Saga-tellers ; and written teaching in the services performed on</p>
<p>Sundays and Saints' days by the Christian ecclesiastics—the one speaking and the other reading whatthey wished the community to learn. Under thissystem we shall not be surprised to hear that the earliestfragments of MSS. which have come down to us fromthat century are portions of ecclesiastical legends andlives of Saints, which the clergy had composed in the Icelandic language for the edification of their flocks. About the beginning of the twelfth century, what maybe termed a national love of letters arose in Iceland, and the Roman character, hitherto employed only asthe vehicle for priestly instruction, was extended to awider field. The poetical literature of the north wascollected into one volume by Saemund the learned, who died in the year 1133. Then, too, it was that theattention of Ari the learned (born 1067, died 1148) was turned towards employing Roman writing witha view towards preserving by means of that alphabetthe history of his forefathers. Thus it was that thefirst sketch and outline arose of what we now knowas Landnáma, a volume that contains the account ofthe colonization of the island. The first step taken, others soon followed in Ari's footsteps. Saga after Sagawas reduced to writing, and before the year 1200 it isreckoned that all the pieces of that kind of composition</p>
<p>which relate to the history of Icelanders previous tothe introduction of Christianity had passed from the oralinto the written shape.* Of all those Sagas, none were sointeresting as Njal, whether as regarded the length of thestory, the number and rank of the chiefs who appearedin it as actors, and the graphic way in which the tragictale was told. As a rounded whole, in which each partis finely and beautifully polished, in which the two greatdivisions of the story are kept in perfect balance andcounterpoise, in which each person who appears is leftfree to speak in a way which stamps him with acharacter of his own, while all unite in working towardsa common end, no Saga had such claims on publicattention as Njala, and it is certain none would soonerhave been committed to writing. The latest period, therefore, that we can assign as the date at which our Saga was moulded into its present shape is the year 1200. The perfect MSS. which exist are indeed ofthe thirteenth century, but there are fragments still</p>
<p>existing of others of an earlier date. When we reflectthat not only Njala was reduced to writing at that period, but very many other Sagas also, some of which haveperished, though a great mass of them still remain, weshall be astonished at the industry displayed by the Icelandic scribes of the twelfth century, and we mayfairly challenge any other nation of Europe in that century to show a like store of vernacular literature.*</p>
<p>The way in which the Saga throws light on the customs and manners of the Icelanders, and in which thosecustoms and manners in their turn illustrate the Saga, have been worked out in the Introduction and Appendix, not by any means as fully as the subject deserves, butsufficiently so to guide the reader who may wish to obtainsome knowledge of a strange state of society along whathe would otherwise find a darksome path. In this placeit will suffice if we say something of the translationitself. It has been purposely made as literal as theidioms of the two languages would permit. In therenderings of the songs indeed a little more licence hasbeen taken, but even these will be found by any onewho is able to compare them with the original to bevery faithful.* The duty of a translator is not to</p>
<p>shape; the only pity is that so few of them did so; and thus itis that we know, surely, neither who composed such and such a Saga, nor when it was thrown into its present shape. I onlywish that Icelanders had begun, like Herodotus and Thucydides, by writing their names on the first line of their book, and so givenit out that they were its authors. Then, perhaps, other peopleswould not have wrongfully taken their works to themselves.”</p>
<p>convey the sense of his original in such a way thatthe idioms and wording of one tongue are sacrificed tothose of the other, but to find out the words andidioms of his own language which answer most fullyand fairly to those of the language from which heis translating, and so to make the one as perfect areflection as is possible of the forms and thoughts ofthe other. From such a point of view a translationbecomes a labour of love indeed, but it is also a workof time and toil. It was in the year 1843 that thetranslator first made up his mind to turn Njala into English, and a considerable portion of the Saga wasrendering, will be found in the maps. The surnames and nicknames have also been turned into English, an attempt which hasnot a little increased the toil of translation. Great allowance mustbe made for these renderings, as those nicknames often arose outof circumstances of which we know little or nothing. Of some, such as “Thorgeir Craggeir,” and “Thorkel foulmouth,” the Sagaitself explains the origin. In a state of society where so many menbore the same name, any circumstance or event in a man’s life, aswell as any peculiarity in form or feature, or in temper and turnof mind, gave rise to a surname or nickname, which clung to himthrough life as a distinguishing mark. The Post Office in the United States is said to give persons in the same district, withsimilar names, an initial of identification, which answers the samepurpose as the Icelandic nickname, thus :—“John P Smith,”— “John Q Smith.” As a general rule the translator has withstoodthe temptation to use old English words. “Busk” and “boun” he pleads guilty to, because both still linger in the languageunderstood by few. “Busk” is a reflective formed from “at búa</p>
<p>actually translated in that year. But it was soonfound that there are some things which, begun in youth, must wait for their completion till middle age ; andthough the work has never been wholly laid aside, ithas been translated and retranslated, in some casesmany times over, in the intervening space. Even now, after all that has been done to make the renderingfaithful, the translator lays it with dread before thepublic, not because he has any doubt as to the beautyof his original, but because he is in despair, lest anyshortcomings of his own should mar the noble featuresof the masterpiece which it has been his care to copy. Indeed, on looking back over the years that have elapsedbetween the conception of the design and its fulfilment, the writer is more and more astonished at his own rash-</p>
<p>sik” “to get oneself ready,” and “boun” is the past participle ofthe active form “búa, búinn,” to get ready. When the leader in Old Ballads says— “Busk ye, busk ye, My bonny, bonny, men,” He calls on his followers to equip themselves ; when they arethus equipped they are “boun.” A bride “busks” herself forthe bridal ; when she is dressed she is “boun.” In old times aship was “busked” for a voyage ; when she was fitted and readyfor sea she was “boun”—whence come our outward “bound” andhomeward “bound.” These with “redes” for counsels or plansare almost the only words in the translation which are not stillin every-day use.</p>
<p>ness in proposing to undertake such a task, with themeans then at his command. There was a printedtext indeed, but one very full of literal errors. Therewas no dictionary of the language, and no reliablework on the Law, which fills so large a part of the Saga. Since 1843, matters have happily changed, insome of these respects ; the text still remains the sametext, carelessly printed from good MSS.; and a newedition, announced as forthcoming for several years, still remains to come forth. But the dictionary ofthe language, the materials for which were collected withso much toil and skill for many years by the lamented Richard Cleasby, who died just as he was reducing themto shape—that dictionary which was hastily finishedafter his death by the generosity of his family, whichwas transferred by them to the translator for publication in England, and which will be published as soonas it is in a fit state to be laid before the world, hasbeen the greatest help in the translation. In many ofthe darkest mysteries of the law, the critical geniusof Maurer has held out a safe and certain guide, andthough last, not least, the constant intercourse andcommunication which the translator has maintainedwith Icelandic scholars, of whom it may be herepermitted to name his old friend Grímur Thomsen, and</p>
<p>his new friend Guðbrandr Vigfússon, have enabled himto throw light on many points of Icelandic topography, as well as on the life, law, and customs of the early Icelanders. Much undoubtedly still remains to be done, even by Icelanders themselves, for the early history oftheir country. There are many customs still to beexplained, many riddles of social life solved, manyknotty points of law unravelled, but so far as knowledgeon any point was to be obtained the translator has soughtfor it, and if it were not to be found, at least done hisbest to find it. In conclusion, this preface must not end without aword of acknowledgment as to the help which the translator has received from the publishers of the work, Messrs. Edmonston and Douglas, who have sparedno expense or pains to lay Njal before the world ina beautiful and becoming shape. In addition to this, the index, a work of no little toil, has been entirelyprepared and arranged by Mr. Douglas, and it maysafely be said, whether the translation, as a translation, be good or bad, no work has seen the lightof late years in this country with a better index. Themaps and plans have been engraved with great careand skill by Mr. Bartholomew; the first from theexcellent map of Iceland based on the trigonometrical</p>
<p>survey undertaken by the Danish government ; thelast, so far as the old Icelandic Hall is concerned, from the beautiful designs of Sigurðr Guðmundson, artist of Reykjavík, who is a living proof that the skillof hand which adorned the Hall at Hjarðarholt in thetenth century, still exists in Iceland at the present day, and whose thorough knowledge of the Sagas has enabled him to restore the dwellings of his forefathers. The plans of the Thingfield are chiefly from a sketchkindly furnished by Captain Forbes, R.N., whose book on Iceland only makes the reader wish that the authorhad spent more time on the island. Mr. Metcalfe, B.D., who spent some months in Iceland during the presentyear, has furnished some valuable topographical information. The sketch for the cover is from the hand of Mr. James Drummond, R.S.A., who has combined thechief weapons mentioned in our Saga, Gunnar's bill, Skarphedinn's axe, and Kari's sword, all bound togetherwith one of the great silver rings found in some Viking'shoard in Orkney, into a most beautiful design. To eachand all of these the translator wishes to return hisbest thanks for that ready help which now enableshim to send Njal out into the world with a smiling face.*</p>
<p>It was a foster-father’s duty, in old times, to rearand cherish the child which he had taken from the armsof its natural parents, his superiors in rank. And somay this work, which the translator has taken from thehouse of Icelandic scholars, his masters in knowledge, and which he has reared and fostered so many yearsunder an English roof, go forth and fight the battle oflife for itself, and win fresh fame for those who gave itbirth. It will be reward enough for him who has firstclothed it in an English dress if his foster-child addsanother leaf to that evergreen wreath of glory whichcrowns the brows of Iceland’s ancient worthies.</p>
<p>Christmas Eve, 1860.</p>
<p>Skinnbókum, með Konunglegu leyfi, ok prentuð í Kaupmannahaufn Árið 1772 af Johann Rúdolph Thiele.” “The Saga of Njál Thorgeir’s son and his sons, etcra. edited from old MS. with Royallicence, and printed in Copenhagen in the year 1772 by John Rudolph Thiele.” In the year 1809 appeared “Njál’s Saga. Historia Njali et Filiorum Latine reddita, cum adjectâ chronologiâ, variis textus Islandici lectionibus, earumque crisi, nec non glossario et indice rerum et locorum. Sumtibus Petri Friderici Suhmii et Legati Arna-Magnæani. Havniæ Anno M.D.CCCIX. Literis Typographi Johannis Rudolphi Thiele.” The various readings, the notes, and the versions of the songs in this Latin translation, are particularly good, but the new edition of the Icelandic text, so long promised by Konrad Gíslason, is much needed.</p>
<h3>Notes</h3>
<p id="note-preface-1">Guðbrandr Vigfússon.</p>
<p id="note-preface-2">This word is invented like Laxdæla, Gretla, and others, to escape the repetition of the word Saga, after that of the person or place to which the story belongs. It combines the idea of the subject and the telling in one word.</p>
<p id="note-preface-3">Many particulars mentioned in the Saga as wonderful are no wonders to us. Thus in the case of Gunnar's bill, when we are told that it gave out a strange sound before great events, this probably only means that the shaft on which it was mounted was of some hard ringing wood unknown in the north. It was a foreign weapon, and if the shaft were of lance wood, the sounds it gave out when brandished or shaken would be accounted for at once without a miracle.</p>
<p id="note-preface-4">There can be no doubt that it was considered a grave offence to public morality to tell a Saga untruthfully. Respect to friends and enemies alike, when they were dead and gone, demanded that the histories of their lives, and especially of their last moments, should be told as the events had actually happened. Our own Saga affords a good illustration of this, and shows at the same time how a Saga naturally arose out of great events. When King Sigtrygg was Earl Sigurd's guest at Yule, and Flosi and the other Burners were about the Earl's court, the Irish king wished to hear the story of the Burning, and Gunnar Lambi's son was put forward to tell it at the feast on Christmas day. It only added to Kari's grudge against him to hear Gunnar tell the story with such a false leaning, when he gave it out that Skarphedinn had wept for fear of the fire, and the vengeance which so speedily overtook the false teller was looked upon as just retribution. But when Flosi took up the story, he told it fairly and justly for both sides, &quot;and therefore,&quot; says the Saga, &quot;what he said was believed.&quot;</p>
<p id="note-preface-5">It is positively stated in Sturlúnga, I. 107, that all the Sagas of that date were written down before the death of Bishop Brandr, who died in the year 1201. Compare Guðbrandr Vig- fússon, Safn til Sög. Isl., II. 190, where, by a misprint, the refe- rence to Sturlúnga is wrongly given as II. 17. It should either be by vol. and page, I. 107, as above, or by part and chapter, ii. 38. As the passage is very important, it is worth while to correct the misprint.</p>
<p id="note-preface-6">The following very sensible remarks are translated from the Icelandic Preface to Egils Saga Reykjavík, 1856 :—&quot; We may say the same of this, as of all the best Sagas relating to Iceland, that their authors never wilfully tell untruths; they write down the Saga just as it had taken shape, little by little, and just as they believe that all had happened. Where, for instance, the strength or daring of any man are plainly overdrawn, the reason of this is, not that the authors had any wish to exaggerate on those points, but rather because they had heard the story told so, and had made up their minds that so it must have been. The same may be said of the superstitions and contradictions which occur in the Sagas. They show no wilful purpose to tell untruths, but simply are proofs of the beliefs and turn of thought of men in the age when the Sagas were reduced to writing. But though the Icelandic Saga-writers followed oral tradition, they may never- theless be rightly called authors. The choice of words and style, the whole hue of the story and handling of the subject, are their work. Had any other man, for example, put Njal's Saga into shape than he who actually undertook that task, then the Saga would have been quite another thing than it really is. It was granted to few to clothe that story in so fair a garb. The writers of the Icelandic Sagas would therefore have had every right to inscribe their names on the Sagas which they threw into</p>
<p id="note-preface-7">It will be seen, that in most cases the names of places throughout the Saga have been turned into English, either in whole or in part, as “ Lithend” for “ Hlíðarendi,” and “ Bergthors- knoll” for “ Bergthorshvol.” The translator adopted this course to soften the ruggedness of the original names for the English reader, but in every case the Icelandic name, with its English</p>
<p id="note-preface-8">The following is the title of the original :—&quot; Sagan af Njáli Þorgeirsyni ok sonum hans etcra. Útgefin efter gaumlum</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">Physical Features</h2>
<h3>PHYSICAL FEATURES.</h3>
<p>LET us begin with the beginning. Iceland is an islandin the North Atlantic, on the very edge of the Arctic Circle; just on the verge of the domain of the old giants Frost and Snow, who lay their icy hands on one or twooutlying capes and headlands. It stretches from 63° 24′ to 66° 30′ N. lat., and from 13° 15′ to 24° 40′ W. long. It contains more than 40,000 square miles, and is thusconsiderably larger than Ireland, the area of which weknow to be 32,511 square miles. Let us suppose thatwe are nearing the island after the usual passage, andthat we have made the land off Dyrhólaey, or Portland, on the south-west. We have then before us a narrowstrip of coast, backed by huge Jökuls or ice mountains, down from whose flanks mighty glaciers stride to thesea, which is fed by them with fearful torrents. Aswe run along the land we have the Vestmanna Eyjar, the Westmen's or Irishmen's Isles, on our lee, and arenearly off the mouth of Markarfljót (Markfleet), which</p>
<p>sweeps to the main by many mouths, the eastmost ofwhich runs sharp under the spurs of Eyjafell. Here thefeatures of the land change. The mountains cease, andthe coast trends away west in the shape of a broad irregular bay, the westernmost point of which is formed bythe bold volcanic promontory which runs down from Arnesthing through Gullbringssysla, till it juts into thesea at Reykjaness. We have now a vast alluvial plainbefore us, which stretches away to the west further thanthe eye can reach, and runs up into the heart of theisland, first as a dead flat, then as a swelling, rolling, upland plain, and at last is broken into dales leading upto the fells, or mountain plateau, which fill the centreof the island. Hekla “the Cloak” blocks up the background, and in the middle distance rise the three peaksof Thrihyrningr, “Threecorner,” as famous in our Sagaas Eildon Hill in Scottish story. Within sight of thebreakers which dash along the beach, stands a knoll orelevation, close to the midstream of Markfleet. It isalmost the only bit of rising ground on the whole plain, and is well worthy of the reader’s attention. It is Bergthoirsknoll, the abode of Njal, the hero of our story. Now, still sailing west, we double the headlands of Reykjaness and Skagi, and are in the noble Faxafirth. Onour right is Reykjavík, and forty miles before us, right</p>
<p>across the firth, is Snæfell (Snowfell), that mighty massof ice, rising more than 4700 feet above the level of thesea—a mountain which so many have wished to climb, while so few have succeeded in the attempt. In the midstof Faxafirth opens Borgarfirth, surrounded by a fruitfulregion, famous for having been the abode of Egil Skallagrim’s son and other great men. Beyond Öndverðarnesswe are in Breiðifjörðr (Broadfirth), the deepest, as Faxafirth is the widest, of all the Iceland firths, which, running deep into the land, throws off to the east an armcalled Hvammsfirth, on the shores of which many fruitfuldales open. This is the Dale Country, a district famousin Icelandic story, and which the reader must bear wellin mind. The main arm of Broadfirth runs straighton till it ends in Gilsfirth. On the eastern shore ofthis mighty inlet, just before Hvammsfirth branches offfrom it, stands Helgafell, a very sacred spot in theannals of the land, but to us chiefly noteworthy as theabode of Snorri the priest, of whom we shall hear morein our Saga. Leaving the Broadfirth, with its manylesser firths and islands, we shape our course northwest, run through the race off Látrarröst, and pass inrapid succession the West Firths. On the shores of oneof these, at Hawkdale in Dýrafirth, lived Gísli Súr’sson, a man of noble nature, the best skald perhaps that</p>
<p>the island ever bred, and famous for his adventures asan outlaw. Now for a while our course is north till weturn Horn, the North Cape. Here we almost touchthe Arctic Circle. Now our course is south-east, as werun along the coast into Strandarflói and Húnaflói, where the water so eats into the land at Bitrufirth asnearly to join Gilsfirth at the top of Broadfirth on thewest and so to make the north-west district of the land, which we have just sailed round, an island of itself. Doubling another bluff-headed cape, we open the Skagafirth and sight Drángey, the Drongs, famous for Grettirthe strong, the greatest of all Icelandic outlaws, and hisfate; and so sailing east we come to one of the mostfamous districts in Iceland, the great island firth, Eyjafirth. Well up the firth, on the western shore, lay Modruvale (Möðruvellir), the abode of Gudmund the powerful, one of the greatest of Iceland’s chiefs, and of whom weshall hear in our story. Next we come to Skjálfandithe “ quaking, trembling” sheet of water, and Axefirth. Rounding the wild headland of Rifstangi, where we arefairly within the Arctic Circle, we skim across Thistlefirth, and doubling Lánganes, Longness, we steer southeast for Weaponfirth and the districts watered by thetwo great Jokul rivers, Jökulsdalewater and Lagarfleet. Now we run past the East Firths, which extend from</p>
<p>Seydisfirth to Hornfirth, and pass many places mentionedin our Saga. Next we reach the narrow strip of foreshore, over which tower the hideous wastes of the Vatna Jökul, one peak of which, the Öræfa Jökul, is the highestpoint in the island, rising to more than 6400 feet ; and now we sight Ingolf’s Höfði, Ingolf’s Head, the firstland made by the first settler from Norway, whichjuts out from an iron-bound coast, and has had a badname, time out of mind, for the many wrecks whichhave happened underneath or near it. A few miles upthe country just above it is Swinefell, the abode of Flosi, a man whom we shall soon know well. Further southwest along the coast are the great sands of Skeidará and the district of Meðalland, Middleland, once sofair, but wasted at the end of the last century, by thefearful eruptions of the Skaptá Jokul. Above Middleland is Siða “ the Side,” a strip of hillside country famousfor the virtues of Hall of the Side. Now we near thestupendous crags of Höfðabrekka, Headbrink, wherethe mountains almost stride into the main ; and a fewmiles more bring us back to Dyrhólaey, or Portland, whence we began our voyage. A glance at the map willshew that the heart of the island is an elevated plateau outof which have risen peaks and blocks, bluffs and needles, such as Baula, and Bláfell and Eldborg, together with great</p>
<p>layers and ridges of lava, at the bidding of the volcanicfire which works so wildly in the bowels of the earth. Out of those regions, alternately the prey of fire andfrost, issue many streams, which vary in depth and bulk, as rains fall or snow melts. The chief of these for lengthand size are the Thurso (Þjórsá) and Markfleet (Markarfljót), in the south-west. The two Whitewaters (Hvítá), one of which runs into the sea in the south-west at Eyrar, the other further west in Borgarfirth. In the north, the chief streams are the Blandwater (Blandá), whichruns into Hunafirth; Quakewater (Skjálfandafljót) whichruns into Skjálfandi Bay; and Jökul-water which runsinto Axefirth. In the north-east, two great streams rundown, side by side, from the northern face of the mighty Vatna Jökul, the Lagarfleet and Jökulsdale-water. They both fall into the sea at Hèraðsflói. On the southeast coast, the course of the rivers is shorter, but theyare the worst of all to cross, fed as they are by the immense glaciers which lie close behind them, and rushingto the sea with a quick fall and straight course. The worstof all these streams is said to be the Fulilæk, or Jökulwater, which falls into the sea between Solheim and Skogar, and drains the Myrdal Jökul, one of the ravines of which, Kötlugjá, has been during the last summer (1860) thescene of the latest eruption of volcanic fire in Iceland.</p>
<h3>FIRST SETTLERS.</h3>
<p>Such is a rapid sketch of the physical features of Iceland. If we look at the early history of the island weshall find that it had been visited long before the Norwegian sea-rovers ever sought its shores. Already inthe eighth century of the Christian era it was wellknown to a class of men who have left their traces inalmost every one of the outlying islands of the west. These were the Culdee anchorites, who sought thosesolitudes for the purposes of prayer and religiousexercises, a class not likely to spread, since theywere no lovers of women, but who left traces behindthem in their cells and church furniture which wererecognised by the early Icelanders themselves ashaving been the handiwork of Christian men. Butbesides these Icelandic traditions we have positiveevidence of the fact. Dicuilus, an Irish monk, who, inthe year 825, wrote a work, De Mensurâ Orbis, relatesthat at least thirty years before he had seen and spokenwith several monks who had visited the island of Thile, as they called it. Besides other particulars, the story isaccompanied with a calculation of the duration of theseasons and the length of the days at different times of theyear, which shows clearly that Iceland, and Iceland</p>
<p>alone, could have been the island visited by theseanchorites.*</p>
<p>The common name for all these anchorites amongthe Northmen was Papar. Under this name we findthem in Orkney and Shetland, in the Faroe Islands, andin Iceland, and to this day the name “Papey,” in allthose localities, denotes the fact that the same piousmonks who had followed St. Columba to Iona, and whohad filled the cells at Enhallow, and Egilsha, and Papain the Orkneys, were those who, according to the accountof Dicuil, had sought Thile, or Iceland, that they mightpray to God in peace.</p>
<p>The first settlers on Iceland, then, were Irishmen and Christian priests ; the next more than half a century afterwere Northmen and priests also, but heathen priests, thefirst article of whose creed was work rather than prayer.</p>
<h3>THE NORTHMEN IN ICELAND.</h3>
<p>The men who colonized Iceland towards the end ofthe ninth century of the Christian æra, were of nosavage or servile race. They fled from the overbearingpower of the king, from that new and strange doctrine</p>
<p>of government put forth by Harold Fairhair, 860—933, which made them the king’s men at all times, insteadof his only at certain times for special service, whichlaid scatts and taxes on their lands, which interferedwith vested rights and world-old laws, and allowed themonarch to meddle and make with the freemen’s allodialholdings. As we look at it now, and from anotherpoint of view, we see that what to them was unbearabletyranny, was really a step in the great march of civilization and progress, and that the centralization and consolidation of the royal authority, according to Charlemagne’s system, was in time to be a blessing to the kingdoms of the north. But to the freeman it was a curse. He fought against it as long as he could ; worsted overand over again, he renewed the struggle, and at last, when the isolated efforts, which were the key-stone of hisedifice of liberty, were fruitless, he sullenly withdrew fromthe field, and left the land of his fathers, where, as hethought, no free-born man could now care to live. Nowit is that we hear of him in Iceland, where Ingolf wasthe first settler in the year 874, and was soon followedby many of his countrymen. Now, too, we hear of himin all lands. Now France—now Italy—now Spain, feelthe fury of his wrath, and the weight of his arm. Aftera time, but not until nearly a century has passed, he</p>
<p>spreads his wings for a wider flight, and takes serviceunder the great emperor at Byzantium, or Micklegarth —the great city, the town of towns—and fights his foesfrom whatever quarter they come. The Moslem in Sicilyand Asia, the Bulgarians and Sclavonians on the shoresof the Black Sea and in Greece, well know the temper ofthe northern steel, which has forced many of their chosenchampions to bite the dust. Wherever he goes the Northman leaves his mark, and to this day the lions ofthe Acropolis are scored with runes which tell of histriumph.</p>
<p>But of all countries, what were called the Western Lands were his favourite haunt. England, wherethe Saxons were losing their old dash and daring, andsettling down into a sluggish sensual race; Ireland, the flower of Celtic lands, in which a system of greatage and undoubted civilization was then fast falling topieces, afforded a tempting battle-field in the everlastingfeuds between chief and chief; Scotland, where thepower of the Picts was waning, while that of the Scotshad not taken firm hold on the country, and most of allthe islands in the Scottish Main, Orkney, Shetland, andthe outlying Faroe Isles;—all these were his chosen abode. In those islands he took deep root, established himselfon the old system, shared in the quarrels of the chiefs</p>
<p>and princes of the Mainland, now helped Pict and now Scot, roved the seas and made all ships prizes, and keptalive his old grudge against Harold Fairhair and thenew system by a long series of piratical incursions onthe Norway coast. So worrying did these Vikingcruizes at last become, that Harold, who meantime hadsteadily pursued his policy at home, and forced all mento bow to his sway or leave the land, resolved to crushthe wasps that stung him summer after summer in theirown nest. First of all he sent Kettle flatnose, a mightychief, to subdue the foe ; but though Kettle waged successful war, he kept what he won for himself. It wasthe old story of setting a thief to catch a thief; and Harold found that if he was to have his work done tohis mind he must do it himself. He called on his chiefsto follow him, levied a mighty force, and, sailing suddenly with a fleet which must have seemed an armadain those days, he fell upon the Vikings in Orkney and Shetland, in the Hebrides and Western Isles, in Manand Anglesey, in the Lewes and Faroe—wherever hecould find them he followed them up with fire andsword. Not once, but twice he crossed the sea afterthem, and tore them out so thoroughly, root and branch, that we hear no more of these lands as a lair of Vikings, but as the abode of Norse Jarls and their</p>
<p>udallers,* who look upon the new state of things athome as right and just, and acknowledge the authorityof Harold and his successors by an allegiance more orless dutiful at different times, but which was never afterwards entirely thrown off.</p>
<p>It was just then, just when the unflinching will of Harold had taught this stern lesson to his old foes, andarising in most part out of that lesson, that the greatrush of settlers to Iceland took place. We have alreadyseen that Ingolf and others had settled in Icelandfrom 874 downwards, but it was not until nearly twentyyears afterwards that the island began to be thicklypeopled. More than half of the names of the firstcolonists contained in the venerable Landnáma Book —the Book of Lots, the Doomsday of Iceland, and farlivelier reading than that of the Conqueror—are thoseof Northmen who had been before settled in the British Isles. Our own country then was the great stepping-</p>
<h3>Notes</h3>
<p id="note-physical-features-1">See Dicuili Liber de Mensurâ Orbis Terræ, Ed Valckenaer Paris, 1807; and Maurer Beiträge Zur Rechtsgeschichte des Ger- manischen Nordens, I. 35.</p>
<p id="note-physical-features-2">Udaller—freeholder—that is, the holder of certain property as his own, óðal, without any superior lord. The Low Latin allodium was made out of the word, whence our allodial. For every informa- tion as to the rights of the Orkney udallers, see “Oppressions in Orkney and Zetland,” presented to the Maitland and Abbotsford Clubs by Mr. Balfour, of Balfour and Trenaby, who has brought an amount of energy and learning to bear on the subject which de- serves all praise.</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">Religion of the Race</h2>
<p>stone between Norway and Iceland ; and this one factis enough to account for the close connection which the Icelanders ever afterwards kept up with their kinsmenwho had remained behind in the islands of the west.</p>
<h3>RELIGION OF THE RACE.</h3>
<p>We have seen that the first comers to Iceland hadbeen Christian anchorites. But it was not as anchoritesand priests that the new settlers came. Priests indeedthere were amongst them, but not Christian priests. Every father of a family was a priest in his own house, and every father of a family was a king in his own house. That was their notion of the priesthood, and that was theirnotion of the kingly power. They had in fact hardlypassed beyond the limits of the patriarchal state. As patriarchs, then, the new settlers came, each head of a housewith his kith and kin, with his sons and his daughters, with his freedmen and thralls, with his oxen and fatlings. As a priest, too, he came, to whom it belonged tofulfil the simple rites of his faith ; he brought the holypillars of his high-seat, the props of his tribunal, andthe ornament of his drinking-hall, and sometimes heeven brought with him a portion of the sacred soilitself, a foot or two of Norway earth, on which topitch those holy pillars, or to rear a new shrine in a</p>
<p>strange land in honour of the ancient gods. A few wordsmust suffice to sketch the most striking features of hisfaith. It is idle to attempt to trace, in the creed whichrevered Odin and the Æsir as Gods, any echo of the Hebrew doctrine of the One True God. Neither timenor place allowed that Semitic verity to resound so far. The Northman’s creed was homemade, and it was madethus. First, in the gray dawn of time, came a worshipof the elements. When man is weak and nature rude, he bows before the natural powers which he has not yetlearnt to tame. Thus, he adores the wind that whelmshis frail bark beneath the waves, the blustering storm, the driving snow, the bristling ice, the boisterous sea. He personifies them as Giants, malevolent to man. Butas man grows strong, nature grows weak. He builds himhouses and defies the storm, in better clothing he bravesthe bitter snow and frost, in better boats he sails insafety over the treacherous sea. Nature bows and bendsbefore him, from her thrall he becomes her master— the reign of the bad powers is over. But man must havea God; and now that he has put nature under his feet, he worships himself. Thus, a new race of divinitiesarise, the disposers and arrangers, and subduers ofnature; he tills the fields, and, as seed time and harvestsucceed, he worships the God that sends the golden</p>
<p>grain ; he tracks and fells the monarch of the wood, andhe worships the hunter’s God ; and so on, with shipsand skates, with tools and arms ; for every step whichhe makes in social progress he fills a new niche in the Pantheon of his faith, till at last he rises to feelings andemotions, and adores his own passions as the Gods of War and Love and Song. The divinities of such a faith, like the Spectre of the Brocken, are simply the shadowsof man himself, mimicking his gestures and actions, andlooming huge and mighty on the misty veil which hidesthe Holy of Holies from his sight. But in all religions one must rule. There are norepublics, though there may be tyrannies, in mattersof faith. Here, again, the Northman’s choice of the Supreme God was a true reflection of himself. Onemerging from nature-worship in the savage state, hepassed into the patriarch, he became the father of afamily, and his gods were patriarchal gods. Odin, the Great Father, was the sire of gods and men. The Æsir, the lesser gods, were his children, either by birth orchoice, and they revered and obeyed him as the headof their house, whose might and wisdom far exceededtheirs. As time rolled on, the Great Father takes anothername. He is now not the Father of All, but the Fatherof the Slain. He has become the God of Battles ; and</p>
<p>this change marks the time when the Northman, straitened at home by the natural increase of population, andattacked from abroad by other tribes, rushes forth, conquering and to conquer, and lays new lands underhis feet.</p>
<p>A few more strokes will complete the sketch. As Fate was above Zeus himself, so Fate was stronger than Odin and the Æsir. A gloomy Fate. Over this faithhung a cloud of melancholy which no brilliant feats ofarms could brighten. It was foredoomed, and felt thatit was foredoomed, to pass away. It was as it werea cornfield won from the wilderness. Around it stilllowered the wild natural powers, expelled but notextinct. Nay, the day and the hour were ever drawingnigh when the God of Battles would have to fight forhis own, and would fall, with almost every member ofhis family.</p>
<p>At the period of which we write, the dreaded “Twilight of the Gods,” the awful day of doom, was impending. Balder, the bright and good, had passed from thehappy family circle of the Æsir to the cold abodes of Hell and death, and the Northman felt, as many havefelt when the heavy hand of death has been busy intheir house, as though the sun of his religion were fastsinking behind a bank of cloud, and that these things</p>
<p>were but the warning of worse woes and still deepergloom. Still the Northman went cheerily and heartily tohis work. It was hard, but Thor would have harderwork when Midgard’s Worm came. He might lose alimb. Well! Týr lost a limb when the Wolf bit off hishand; but it was his duty. He might die. Why, Odinwas himself to die at last. Let him die, then, but diebravely, and haste to Valhalla as one of Odin’s chosenchampions, and there be ready to stand by him as hisfaithful servant and soldier at the great day of doom. Above all things, too, we must bear in mind thatthis faith was suited to the race that believed it. Theyhad made it for themselves—it was their own handiwork. By slow degrees, little by little, and step bystep, it had sprung up among them. Every man ofthem believed it, for it was part of themselves, flesh oftheir flesh, bone of their bone, and soul of their soul ; and until their stony hearts were changed, and meltedbefore the warm breath of a livelier and a better faith, they clung to it, and died for it, for it was but the transfiguration of the natural man, with all his virtues andvices, all his feelings and passions and natural affections. Nor was it any cringing creed. The Northman was justified rather by works than faith. If he did his duty</p>
<p>Valhalla was his rightful meed. He looked upon thelesser Gods, even in the height of his belief, as abovehim in power indeed, but as only his equals in right. They were bound to protect him if he sacrificed to themand honoured them, but if he thought himself unfairlytreated, even by his Gods, he openly took them to taskand forsook their worship.* Numerous instances of thisfeeling occur in the Sagas, and, as the reverence forthe old faith declined, it naturally became stronger andstronger.</p>
<h3>SUPERSTITIONS OF THE RACE.</h3>
<p>Besides his creed the Northman had many superstitions. He believed in good giants† and bad giants, in darkelves and bright elves, in superhuman beings who filledthe wide gulf which existed between himself and thegods. He believed, too, in wraiths and fetches and</p>
<p>guardian spirits,* who followed particular persons, andbelonged to certain families—a belief which seems tohave sprung from the habit of regarding body and soulas two distinct beings, which at certain times took eacha separate bodily shape. Sometimes the guardian spiritor fylgja took a human shape, at others its form tookthat of some animal fancied to foreshadow the characterof the man to whom it belonged. Thus it becomes abear, a wolf, an ox, and even a fox, in men. The fylgjurof women were fond of taking the shape of swans. To seeone’s own fylgja was unlucky, and often a sign that aman was “fey,” or death-doomed. So, when Thord Freedmanson tells Njal that he sees the goat wallowing in itsgore in the “town” of Bergthorsknoll, the foresighted mantells him that he has seen his own fylgja, and that he mustbe doomed to die. Finer and nobler natures often saw theguardian spirits of others. Thus Njal saw the fylgjurof Gunnar’s enemies, which gave him no rest the livelong night, and his weird feeling is soon confirmed bythe news brought by his shepherd. From the fylgiaof the individual it was easy to rise to the still moreabstract notion of the guardian spirits of a family, whosometimes, if a great change in the house is about tobegin, even show themselves as hurtful to some member of</p>
<p>the house.* He believed also that some men had morethan one shape (voru eigi einhamir) ; that they couldeither take the shapes of animals, as bears or wolves, andso work mischief ; or that, without undergoing bodilychange, an access of rage and strength came over them,</p>
<p>and more especially towards night, which made themmore than a match for ordinary men. Such men werecalled hamrammir, “ shapestrong,” and it was remarkedthat when the fit left them they were weaker than theyhad been before.*</p>
<p>This gift was looked upon as something “uncanny,” and it leads us at once to another class of men, whosesupernatural strength was regarded as a curse to thecommunity. These were the Baresarks.* What thehamrammir men were when they were in their fits the Baresarks almost always were. They are described asbeing always of exceeding, and when their fury rosehigh, of superhuman strength. They too, like thehamrammir men, were very tired when the fits passedoff. What led to their fits is hard to say. In the caseof the only class of men like them now-a-days, that ofthe Malays running a-muck, the intoxicating fumes ofbangh or arrack are said to be the cause of their fury. One thing, however, is certain, that the Baresark, likehis Malay brother, was looked upon as a public pest, and the mischief which they caused, relying partly nodoubt on their natural strength, and partly on the hold</p>
<p>many fathers of families who indulge in a nap after dinner wouldpass for werewolves or worse.</p>
<p>which the belief in their supernatural nature had on themind of the people, was such as to render their killinga good work. Again, the Northman believed that certain men were “fast” or “hard;” that no weapons would touch them orwound their skin ; that the mere glance of some men’seyes would turn the edge of the best sword ; and thatsome persons had the power of withstanding poison. He believed in omens and dreams and warnings, insigns and wonders and tokens ; he believed in goodluck and bad luck, and that the man on whom fortunesmiled or frowned bore the marks of her favour ordispleasure on his face ; he believed also in magicand sorcery, though he loathed them as unholy rites. With one of his beliefs our story has much to do, though this was a belief in good rather than in evil. He believed firmly that some men had the inborn gift, not won by any black arts, of seeing things and eventsbeforehand. He believed, in short, in what is called in Scotland “second sight.” This was what was called being “forspár”* or “framsýnn,” “foretelling” and “foresighted.”</p>
<h3>Notes</h3>
<p id="note-religion-1">One quotation must suffice for all :—&quot; Hrafnkell,&quot; who had been a great worshipper of Frey, &quot;heard that the sons of Thjostar,&quot; who had turned him out of house and land, &quot; had killed Freyfax,&quot; a horse whom he had hallowed to Frey, &quot; and burnt the temple. Then Hrafnkell answers and says, ' I think it folly to believe in the Gods,' and says, he will never thenceforth believe in them ; and he kept his word, for from that day forward he offered no sacrifices.&quot; —Hrafnkell Freysgoða Saga, p. 24. Kjobenh. 1847.</p>
<p id="note-religion-2">Such, for instance, as Barðr Snæfells Ás. Comp. Maurer. Die Bekehrung des Norwegischen Stammes, II. 60, foll.</p>
<p id="note-religion-3">Hamingjur or fylgjur.</p>
<p id="note-religion-4">See the curious account of the death of Thidrandi, Hall of the Side's son, whom our Saga simply says that &quot; the goddesses, Dísir, slew.&quot; The whole story is contained in the younger Saga of Olaf Tryggvi's son, ch. 215, pp. 192-6. We learn from it, that Thidrandi having been warned by a foresighted man not to stir out of his father's house one night, if any one knocked at the door, still sprang up when the knock came and went out, thinking it might be some one in want of shelter. When he got into the yard, he saw on one side nine women in black raiment, riding from the north on nine horses, and holding drawn swords in their hands ; against them from the south came nine other women in white raiment on white horses. Then Thidrandi tried to get back into the house to tell his story, but the nine women in black raiment got between him and the door, and fell on him with their swords, while he kept them off as well as he could. Just then the wise man who had warned him sprang up from his sleep, and, going out to look for Thidrandi, found him lying on the ground sorely wounded. They brought him, and he told his strange story, but died at early dawn. Of his enemies no trace could be found. When Hall asked the wise man what all this meant, he answered, &quot; I know uot, but I can guess that these were no other women than the guardian spirits of thy race (fylgjur yðra frænda) ; and I suspect that a change of faith is about to happen, and that these your goddesses (dísir) must have seen what is coming to pass, and that they are angry at it, lest they should not have the respect paid to them to which they have been wont.&quot;</p>
<p id="note-religion-5">For the actual change</p>
<p id="note-religion-6">The derivation from bare sark, as though they went into battle bare of armour, in their shirts, without being wounded, has lately been attacked, amongst others, by Sveinbjörn Egilsson, in his Poetical Dict. sub voce. He wishes to derive the first syllable from a form of the word “bear,” and would make it spring from the change of shape into bears, which these hamrammir men were sup- posed to be able to take.</p>
<p id="note-religion-7">The Icelanders carefully observed the distinction between this sort of foreknowledge and ordinary worldly wisdom. We have one of the best instances of this in our Saga itself, where we are told, ch. 113, vol. ii., pp. 117, that “Snorri was the wisest and shrewdest of all those men in Iceland who had not the gift of foresight;” a</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">Social Principles</h2>
<p>Of such men it was said that their “words could not bebroken.” Njal was one of these men ; one of the wisestand at the same time most just and honourable of men. This gift ran in families, for Helgi Njal’s son had it, and it was beyond a doubt one of the deepest-rooted ofall their superstitions.</p>
<h3>SOCIAL PRINCIPLES.</h3>
<p>Besides this creed and these beliefs the new settlerbrought with him certain fixed social principles, whichwe shall do well to consider carefully in the outset. Outof a patriarchal state of society, and a religion based uponit, rose a great groundwork of principles upon whichthe whole fabric of social life in Iceland rested, andwhich must be kept steadily in view as landmarks, if we wish to understand the origin and developmentof an Icelandic commonwealth. First and foremost camethe father’s right of property in his children. Thisright is common to the infancy of all communities, andexists before all law. We seek it in vain in codeswhich belong to a later period, but it has left traces ofitself in all codes, and, abrogated in theory, still often</p>
<p>man like Snorri was vitr maðr, but he would not be forspár. Inlater times, when the old belief was dying out, this proverb was common, “spá er spaks geta,” “prophecy is a wise man’s guess.”</p>
<p>exists in practice. We find it in the Roman law, andwe find it among the Northmen. Thus it was thefather's right to rear his children or not at his will. Assoon as it was born, the child was laid upon the bareground; and until the father came and looked at it, heard and saw that it was strong in lung and limb, lifted it in his arms, and handed it over to the womento be reared, its fate hung in the balance, and life ordeath depended on the sentence of its sire.* After ithad passed safely through that ordeal, it was dulywashed, signed with Thor's holy hammer, and solemnlyreceived into the family. If it were a weakly boy, andstill more often, if it were a girl, no matter whether shewere strong or weak, the infant was exposed to die byravening beasts, or the inclemency of the climate. Many instances occur of children so exposed, who, saved by some kindly neighbour, and fostered beneatha stranger's roof, thus contracted ties reckoned stillmore binding than blood itself.† So long as his</p>
<p>children remained under his roof, they were theirfather's own. When the sons left the paternal roof, theywere emancipated, and when the daughters were marriedthey were also free, but the marriage itself remained tillthe latest times a matter of sale and barter in deed aswell as name. The wife came into the house, in thepatriarchal state, either stolen or bought from her nearest</p>
<p>we know, from the account contained in Njála, which is amply borneout by other sources of information, that, down to the Change of Faith, the practice of exposure—which points terribly to the difficulty feltin supporting a family—prevailed in full force. To leave off idolworship, not to expose their children to perish, and not to eat horseflesh, are the three great abominations which all Christian menmust forsake. The two first speak for themselves; the eating ofhorseflesh needs a word or two of explanation. Horses, thoughaffording very wholesome food, could never have been at any timevery cheap eating. The horseflesh thus branded was the fleshof the sacred horses sacrificed before the heathen altars, at the greatfeasts in honour of the gods. The Christian missionaries lookedupon it in the same light as the meat offered to idols was regardedby the Apostles, and forbade it accordingly. To eat horsefleshwas an abominable heathen practice, and as such it was literallythrown in the teeth of Thorkel foulmouth by Skarphedinn, ch. 119, p. 142, and was resented accordingly. It is strange how long aprejudice lasts. If horseflesh were cheap, there could not bemore wholesome food, and yet the very notion of eating it at allwould be abhorrent to the minds of most persons. It would bewell if all the precepts of Christianity had become as thoroughlypart and parcel of our belief as this question of meats—this prohibition to eat the flesh of animals offered to idols.</p>
<p>male relations; and though in later times when the saletook place it was softened by settling part of the dowerand portion on the wife, we shall do well to bear inmind, that originally dower was only the price paid bythe suitor to the father for his good will; while portion, on the other hand, was the sum paid by the father topersuade a suitor to take a daughter off his hands. Letus remember, therefore, that in those times, as Odin wassupreme in Asgard as the Great Father of Gods andmen, so in his own house every father of the race thatrevered Odin was also sovereign and supreme. In the second place, as the creed of the race was onethat adored the Great Father as the God of Battles; asit was his will that turned the fight; nay, as that wasthe very way in which he chose to call his own to himself,—it followed, that any appeal to arms was looked uponas an appeal to God. Victory was indeed the sign of arightful cause, and he that won the day remained behindto enjoy the rights which he had won in fair fight, but hethat lost it, if he fell bravely and like a man, if he trulybelieved his quarrel just, and brought it without guileto the issue of the sword, went by the very manner ofhis death to a better place. The Father of the Slainwanted him, and he was welcomed by the Valkyries, by Odin’s corse-choosers, to the festive board in Val-</p>
<p>halla. In every point of view, therefore, war and battlewas a holy thing, and the Northman went to the battlefield in the firm conviction that right would prevail. In modern times, while we appeal in declarations ofwar to the God of Battles, we do it with the feelingthat war is often an unholy thing, and that Providenceis not always on the side of strong battalions. The Northman saw Providence on both sides. It was good to live, if one fought bravely, but it was also good to die, if onefell bravely. To live bravely and to die bravely, trustingin the God of Battles, was the warrior's comfortablecreed. But this feeling was also shewn in private life. When two tribes or peoples rushed to war, there Odin, the warrior's god, was sure to be busy in the fight, turning the day this way or that at his will; but he wasno less present in private war, where in any quarrelman met man to claim or to defend a right. There, too, he turned the scale and swayed the day, and there tooan appeal to arms was regarded as an appeal to heaven. Hence arose another right older than all law, the rightof duel—of wager of battle, as the old English law calledit. Among the Northmen it underlaid all their earlylegislation, which, as we shall see, aimed rather at regulating and guiding it, by making it a part and parcel of</p>
<p>the law, than at attempting to check at once a customwhich had grown up with the whole faith of the people, and which was regarded as a right at once so timehonoured and so holy.*</p>
<p>Thirdly, we must never forget that, as it is the Christian’s duty to forgive his foes, and to be patient and longsuffering under the most grievous wrongs, so it was theheathen’s bounden duty to avenge all wrongs, andmost of all those offered to blood relations, to his kith andkin, to the utmost limit of his power.† Hence arose the</p>
<p>constant blood-feuds between families, of which we shallhear so much in our story, but which we shall fail fullyto understand, unless we keep in view, along with thisduty of revenge, the right of property which all headsof houses had in their relations. Out of these twofoldrights, of the right of revenge and the right of property, arose that strange medley of forbearance and bloodthirstiness which stamps the age. Revenge was a duty</p>
<p>The following pretty story, illustrating the duty of revenge, is from Grettir's Saga, ch. 41, Ed. Kbh., 1853:—&quot;It fell on a morning as thosebrothers Grettir and Thorstein lay in their sleeping-loft, that Grettirhad put his arms out of the bed-clothes; Thorstein woke up and sawthat. A little after Grettir woke up too. Then Thorstein said, 'I haveseen thy arms, kinsman,' said he, 'and methinks it is not wonderfulthough thy blows fall heavy on many, for no man's arms have I everseen like them in my life.' 'It might have been known though,' said Grettir, 'that I could not have brought such things to pass as I have done if my joints had not been very well knit.' 'Methinks,' says Thorstein, 'I should like them better if they were slendererbut a little luckier.' 'True it is,' said Grettir, 'as the saying goes, that no man is his own maker; now let me see thy arms.' Thorsteinlet him see them; he was one of the tallest and slightest-made ofmen. Grettir smiled when he saw them, and said, 'There's noneed to look longer at these, all thy ribs are cramped together, and I think I never saw such a pair of tongs as thou bearest about withthee for arms. I hardly think thee as strong as a woman.' 'That maybe,' said Thorstein, 'but yet thou shalt know this, that these myslender arms will avenge thee, or thou wilt never be avenged. Whocan tell what may happen till the end comes.' &quot;</p>
<p>and a right, but property was no less a right ; and so itrested with the father of a family either to take revenge, life for life, or to forego his vengeance, and take a compensation in goods or money for the loss he had sustainedin his property. Out of this latter view arose thosearbitrary tariffs for wounds or loss of life, which weregradually developed more or less completely in all the Teutonic and Scandinavian races, until every injury tolife or limb had its proportionate price, according to therank which the injured person bore in the social scale. These tariffs, settled by the heads of houses, are, in fact, the first elements of the law of nations ; but it must beclearly understood that it always rested with the injuredfamily either to follow up the quarrel by private war, orto call on the man who had inflicted the injury to pay afitting fine.* If he refused, the feud might be followedup on the battlefield, in the earliest times, or in laterdays, either by battle or by law. Of the latter mode ofproceeding, we shall have to speak at greater lengthfarther on ; for the present, we content ourselves withindicating these different modes of settling a quarrel inwhat we have called the patriarchal state. A fourth great principle of his nature was the con-</p>
<p>viction of the worthlessness and fleeting nature of allworldly goods. One thing alone was firm and unshaken, the stability of well-earned fame. “Goods perish, friendsperish, a man himself perishes, but fame never dies tohim that hath won it worthily.” “One thing I know thatnever dies, the judgment passed on every mortal man.” Over all man’s life hung a blind, inexorable fate, a lowerfold of the same gloomy cloud that brooded over Odinand the Æsir. Nothing could avert this doom. Whenhis hour came, a man must meet his death, and until hishour came he was safe. It might strike in the midst of thehighest happiness, and then nothing could avert the evil, but until it struck he would come safe through thedirest peril. This fatalism showed itself among thisvigorous pushing race in no idle resignation. On thecontrary, the Northman went boldly to meet the doomwhich he felt sure no effort of his could turn aside, butwhich he knew, if he met it like a man, would securehim the only lasting thing on earth—a name famous insong and story. Fate must be met then, but the way inwhich it was met, that rested with a man himself, that, at least, was in his own power ; there he might showhis free will; and thus this principle, which might seemat first to be calculated to blunt his energies and weakenhis strength of mind, really sharpened and hardened</p>
<p>them in a wonderful way, for it left it still worth everything to a man to fight this stern battle of life well andbravely, while its blind inexorable nature allowed no roomfor any careful weighing of chances or probabilities, orfor any anxious prying into the nature of things doomedonce for all to come to pass. To do things like a man, without looking to the right or left, as Kari acted whenhe smote off Gunnar's head in Earl Sigurd's hall, wasthe Northman's pride. He must do them openly too, and show no shame for what he had done. To killa man and say that you had killed him, was manslaughter ; to kill him and not to take it on your handwas murder (morðvig, lönvig).* To kill men at dead ofnight was also looked on as murder.† To kill a foe andnot bestow the rights of burial on his body by throwingsand or gravel over him, was also looked on as murder.</p>
<p>Even the wicked Thiostolf throws gravel over Glum inour Saga, and Thord Freedman’s son’s complaint against Brynjolf the unruly was, that he had buried Atli’s bodybadly. Even in killing a foe there was an open gentlemanlike way of doing it, to fail in which was shockingto the free and outspoken spirit of the age. Thorgeir Craggeir and the gallant Kari wake their foes and givethem time to arm themselves before they fall upon them; and Hrapp, too, the thorough Icelander of the commonstamp, “the friend of his friends and the foe of his foes,” stalks before Gudbrand and tells him to his face thecrimes which he has committed. Robbery and piracyin a good straightforward wholesale way were honouredand respected; but to steal, to creep to a man’s abodesecretly at dead of night and spoil his goods, was lookedupon as infamy of the worst kind. To do what laybefore him openly and like a man, without fear of eitherfoes, fiends, or fate; to hold his own and speak hismind, and seek fame without respect of persons; to befree and daring in all his deeds; to be gentle and generous to his friends and kinsmen; to be stern and grimto his foes, but even towards them to feel bound to</p>
<p>Bloodaxe, wishes to have Egil put to death at night, and Arinbjörnsays, “The King (Eric) must not let himself be goaded on to doall thy dastardly deeds. He must not let Egil be put to deathto-night, for night-slayings are murders.”</p>
<p>fulfil all bounden duties ; to be as forgiving to someas he was unyielding and unforgiving to others. Tobe no trucebreaker, nor talebearer nor backbiter. Toutter nothing against any man that he would not dare totell him to his face. To turn no man from his door whosought food or shelter, even though he were a foe— These were other broad principles of the Northman'slife, further features of that steadfast faithful spirit whichhe brought with him to his new home.</p>
<h3>THE LANDNAMTIDE.</h3>
<p>Strong in this faith then, with a feeling of fate abovehim, weighed down by many superstitions, but upheldby a natural nobleness and manliness of character ; clinging to his natural kingship and priesthood as inalienablerights, and trusting to his own good sword, the Northman steered for Iceland. In some cases a manslaughter, in some the fame of the new land, in some a prophecy, in some the invitation of friends and kinsmen whohad gone before, but in most, it was the overbearing of Harold Fairhair* that led him thither. And so theycame all together, simple yeomen, rich landowners, children of lords and earls, in two great streams, onefrom Norway and the other Northern Kingdoms, about</p>
<p>874, and one twenty years later from the West, as wehave said, and in such numbers that it was feared thatall the best blood of the land was leaving the shores ofthe North Sea, and Harold tried to stop the tide ofemigration by a fine. As they neared the shores of the great island, thechoice of the spot for a settlement was left to chance, that is, in those days which allowed the doctrine ofchances far less than our own, to the decision of the Gods. The readiest way to ascertain their will, was tohurl those sacred pillars of the high-seat over board, tolet them drive at the will of the winds and waves, andthen to occupy that portion of the island which lay nextto the beach where they were thrown on shore.* The first step after landing was to view or “ken”† theland by mounting to the top of some high ground, when, if the spot seemed likely to meet the settler’s wants, he</p>
<p>went on to make it his own by peculiar rites and ceremonies. This was called “to hallow the land;” andit was done by surrounding it with a ring of fires, eachof which was in sight of those nearest to it on eitherside, or by merely lighting a bonfire at the mouth ofeach river, which act was supposed to hallow it, as wellas all the streams which flowed into it. This solemnitywas also called, to encircle the land with fire,* and theportion thus hallowed became the settler’s own,† and wasmarked out by certain natural features or artificial signs, which formed the boundaries of his estate. Then camethe work of building the house and farm buildings, theenclosure of the yard, and “town” or home fields, allnecessary tasks, which, though little has been handeddown to us from the earliest times as to their form andconstruction, we may infer from the toughness withwhich the race has clung to its traditions, were not unlike those which we find existing in the next century. But besides these domestic buildings, the great chiefswho were the first settlers invariably built another. This was the Hof or temple for the gods, and this it isnot hard to restore. These buildings consisted of two</p>
<p>parts, a nave and a shrine, which last is expressly compared to the choir or chancel of Christian churches. Thisshrine was the true sanctuary. It was built round andarched. In it, in a half circle, stood the images of thegods, and before them, in the middle of the half circle, was the altar (stalli). On it lay the holy ring (baugr), on which all solemn oaths were sworn ; and there, too, was the blood-bowl (hlautbolli) in which the blood ofthe slaughtered victims was caught, and the blood-twig (hlauttvein) with which the worshippers were sprinkled, to hallow them in the presence of the Almighty Gods. On the altar burned the holy fire, which was never suffered to be quenched.</p>
<p>The worship of the gods consisted in offerings orsacrifices (blót, forn) of all living things, sometimes evenof men. These for the most part were criminals orslaves, and therefore, in the first case, these human sacrifices stood in the same position as our executions. Near every Thing-field, a spot closely connected withthe Temple, stood the stone of sacrifice, on whichthe backs of those victims were crushed and broken, and the holy pool in which another kind of humansacrifices were solemnly sunk. But these human sacrifices, though allowable, were not common; and when weread that the mythical Swedish king On offered up,</p>
<p>one after another, nine sons of his body for the sake oflengthening his own life, and that the Swedish freemenoffered up their king Donald, and their king Olaf Treefeller, because the harvests were so bad; and that, finally, the wicked Earl Hacon, a more historical character, offered up his own son to his favourite divinity, Thorgerda Shrinebride, in order to win the day when hewas about to be worsted by the Vikings of Jomsborg, we may be sure that these were all great exceptions, for some of which might find parallels in Biblical, and for some in British history. We might as well inferthat the Jews were given to human sacrifices, or the English were fond of offering up their kings, becausein the one case Abraham obeyed the divine command, and in the other the Roundheads were driven by theduplicity of Charles to put him to the worst use whichbad subjects can make of a weak king, that of cuttingoff his head, and thus making him a martyr.* Still therewere human sacrifices in those times, but the bulk of the</p>
<p>victims was of another kind. Horses were sacrificed, andoxen and swine, and sheep, which were all fattened forthe festival. Brought before the images of the gods theywere slaughtered, the blood was caught, and with it theworshippers were sprinkled, as well as the images, altar, and walls of the shrine. The fat was melted and theimages were anointed with it, and then rubbed dryand polished. Now the sacrifice turned into a feast; theflesh of the victims was boiled in huge kettles, whichswung over fires lighted down the whole length of thenave, the worshippers took their seats down rows ofbenches on each side, and ate the flesh and supped thebroth. Beer and mead were tapped, and then the chiefwhose temple it was, and who filled the office of priest, rose from his high seat, in the middle of the bench, was so hated as he.&quot; We are still more justified in drawing thisinference, though certainly at a later period, from the words of Hjallti and Gizur at the Althing, just before the adoption of Christianity. &quot; The heathen sacrifice the worst of men, and launch themover cliffs and crags, but we will choose our best men as a gift ofvictory to God.&quot; This was just after the heathen party had resolved, at their direst need, to sacrifice two men out of each Quarterof the island. The practice had evidently degenerated as much asit had amongst the Greeks in the time of Aristophanes, when thescapegoats for sacrifice were chosen from the dregs of the community. Comp. Aristoph. Ranæ, 732. . . . οἷσιν ἡ πόλις πρὸ τοῦ Οὐδὲ φαρμακοῖσιν εἰκῇ ῥᾳδίως ἐχρήσατ’ ἄν.</p>
<p>on the right hand of the nave, and blessed the meatand drink. His duty it was to utter the sacred toasts.* To Odin first the bowl was drained for victory andstrength. The next to Njord and Frey, for peace andgood harvests. A third to Thor, “the almighty God,” as he was called, the Northman’s darling god, andso on, to Bragi the god of song and mirth, and to Freyja, the goddess of love and beauty ; last of all came the cupto the memory of friends and kinsmen dead and gone. Thus merrily and heartily did the sacrifice end, andan awful solemnity was thus softened into the festivitiesof an annual merrymaking. On such occasions also itwas usual to make solemn vows to do this or thatdaring deed, by such and such a stated time ;† and itwas reckoned unlucky and disgraceful not to fulfil them. This was done over Bragi’s cup, and he that made thevow, mounted a raised platform in order to be betterseen and heard by the company. It often happenedthat the truth of the old Norse proverb, “Ale is anotherman”—answering to our “when the wine is in the witis out”—was fully proved ; and those who in their cupshad vowed rash vows, woke up the next morning with</p>
<p>the feeling that they had undertaken a task which theywere hardly fitted to fulfil.* But to return to the settler. After he had hallowed hislot or landnám, built his house and his temple, fenced inhis fields, and raised his march-stones, he proceededto allot portions of his possessions to his kinsmen, followers, and friends. In early times, when the island waswaste, this was an easy task. There was ample elbowroom. The tracts taken by the first settlers were so immense, that they stood in need of many separate abodesto bring them into cultivation. To take only oneinstance of a settlement in a part of Iceland withwhich the reader will soon, it is hoped, be betteracquainted. In the south-west of Iceland, Kettlehæing,† who came to Iceland from Naumdale in Norway, in the year 877, three years after Ingolf the firstsettler, took as his lot or landnám all the Rangrivervales between Thursowater and Markfleet, from the</p>
<p>shore right up to the fell. In such a tract there wasroom for many homesteads, and it will soon be seen withwhat great chiefs the district was filled. This allotmentwas called by various names; sometimes it is termed, “togive land,” or “to show to land,” on the part of the firstsettler, and “to receive,” or “to take land in such aman’s landnám,” on the part of the new comer. So also, we hear of taking land “at the advice” of such asettler, or “with his leave;” and it is plain from manycases, that these expressions imply something morethan mere friendly advice to a stranger as to thespot which was most likely to suit him, and pointrather to leave asked and granted from a superiorto one, who by that very fact acknowledged himselfto be in an inferior position. Sometimes, of course, as in the case of brothers and kinsmen, or dear friends, the leave meant little more than a desire that thoseso close in blood should also be near in their abode; sometimes, too, the relation that existed between thenew comer and the first settler was rather that of landlord and tenant than of those who met on equal terms; but in all cases of such relations, whether equal or un-</p>
<p>asunder at the middle.” His father then gave him trout as hisnickname, and he was called Kettle “hæng” or “trout” ever afterwards. See Fornaldar Sögur, ii. 111, 112.</p>
<p>equal, there was no doubt a feeling of reliance and dependence which often offended the free spirit of the race. Thus Hallstein son of the great chief Thorolf Mostrarskegg deems it unworthy to allow his own father to “show him to land,” and betakes himself to anotherdistrict, to seize an unoccupied lot for himself. Another, Halkell the brother of Kettlebjörn the old, will not hearof taking a portion of the land which his brother, amighty chief, has settled on, but prefers to turn out anearlier settler by a duel ;* and Steinuna, a woman, prefers to buy a bit of land in her kinsman Ingolf's landnám, rather than to take it from him as a gift.</p>
<p>It is easy to explain this dislike of the freeman, aswell as of the freewoman, to have land assigned or givento them, even when it became their own allodial holding. The feeling which underlies the dislike is thatwhich looks upon gifts, if they are not returned bysomething of equal worth, as degrading and dishonouring to the freeborn man. The same feeling still lingersin the hearts of all the Teutonic and Scandinavian races, but in those times it was intense. Tacitus has wellcaught this principle when he describes the Germans as “ delighting in gifts, but as setting little store or obligation on their acceptance.” That was the freeman's</p>
<p>feeling. He took and he gave gifts from and to equals, and they met free and parted free ; but the gifts whicha superior gives to an inferior, and such a gift it was tohave land given to one in another man's landnám, implied at once the undertaking of duties and obligations tothe giver which must be fulfilled when he claimed them. The very act implied allegiance to a lord and master, and as such was offensive to a free spirit. Anything, in short, which hindered a freeman from meeting hisequals on equal terms, was a disgrace. To take landwas a gift which could not be repaid in kind. It loweredhis self-respect, if it led to nothing worse, by puttinghim in a false position, and as such he scorned it. But we must hasten on. The period during whichthe settlement of Iceland was going on lasted aboutsixty years. At the end of that time the island was asfully peopled as it has ever been since, and the numberof inhabitants may be reckoned at 50,000 souls ; anenormous number to have flocked together in so short aspace of time. During all that period each chief, andhis children after him, had lived on his holding, whichformed a little kingdom of itself, allotting his land tonew comers whose kinship, turn of mind, or inferiorityin rank allowed them to accept the gift, marrying andinter-marrying with the families of neighbouring chiefs,</p>
<p>setting up his children in abodes of their own, puttinghis freedmen and thralls out in farms and holdings, fulfilling the duties of the priesthood in his temple, and otherwise exercising what we should now call thelegitimate influence on those around him to which hewas entitled by his strength of arm, or birth, or wealth.</p>
<h3>CIVIL POWER OF THE PRIESTS.</h3>
<p>We have hitherto only looked at the priesthood ofthese chiefs from one point of view. There was nopriesthood among the Scandinavian races, if we meanby priesthood a separation of society into the twoclasses of priests and laymen. Church and State infact were both one. The word for priest was goði orhofgoði (temple-priest), and, besides his priestly functions, the very circumstances of birth, wealth, and influence, which led to his fulfilling those functions, gavehim social power of another kind. He was the onlycivil, just as he was the only religious authority—minister and magistrate in one ; but in that wild and shifting state of society his power might be of a very fleetingkind. When one of these great chiefs built his hof ortemple on the land which he had occupied, the neighbours flocked to it, not because they were bound to doso by any law, but because it was their natural place of</p>
<p>worship. The voluntary principle was then triumphant, and as it was free to any man in the neighbourhood, evenin the same landnám, to build a temple for himself, soit stood free to the neighbours to worship at that templeif they chose. This fact leads to another consideration. As the influence exercised by the chiefs depended as muchon bodily strength, personal prowess, and skill in arms, ason birth and wealth, it often happened that the influenceof a great chief might wane as he grew old, or lost hischildren or kinsmen, and that the influence of othersin the neighbourhood rose in the same proportion. Itfollowed, therefore, that after a great chief had allottedall his land, he might find, at the end of his life, that hehad raised up most dangerous rivals to himself, that histemple was deserted, and that the eyes of the neighbours were now turned to another lord. If a manattained a green old age, if he lived surrounded bystrong and stalwart sons, he might keep his influencetill his death, and the family tradition might be prolonged, as we know it was in many families ; but in thecontrary case, he lost the reality of his power, though hekept the shadow. He was, in fact, left like a clergymanon the voluntary principle, without a congregation. If this was so with regard to the priestly part of hisfunctions, it was still more so with regard to what might</p>
<p>be called his social and judicial duties. Besides the careof the temple, the judicial and executive belonged tohim. To him it belonged to call together the Things, or meetings of the people, at stated times, to discusspublic business. As priest he hallowed the Thing, encircled it with the holy bands (vébönd), and proclaimedpeace while it lasted; as chief magistrate in the newland, as he had filled the same office in the old, he presided over the meeting. In trials, which were conductedon time-honoured principles which the settlers broughtwith them from the land of their fathers, it fell on himto name the judges, and to superintend the proceedings. In short, he takes the leadership of the district; heis bound to protect those under and belonging to him, and they owe him help and allegiance. He keeps thepeace, chases robbers out of the country; in times ofscarcity he takes measures to avert the evil. If foreignships run into any port in his district he is the firstto board them; they may not trade till he has settledthe price at which the cargo is to be offered for sale, and he it is that fixes where the crew are to be lodgedwhen they lay up their ship for the winter. He ridesto the Things with a train of his Thingmen at his back. In later times he could call on the ninth part of his Thingmen to follow him to the Althing, and when</p>
<p>there they were bound to back him in his suits andquarrels, while it was his duty to stand by them, andsee them righted in theirs. The power and influenceof the Priest, in short, extended to every branch ofwhat we should now call the public service ; andthough the power he exerted, and the subordinationwhich he exacted, were undefined in principle, and depended much on the energy and strength of character ofeach possessor of the office, there can be no doubt thatin the very earliest times it was not only one of greatpower and importance, but the sole existing authority.</p>
<p>One great check on the tendency of this undefinedpower to become arbitrary and tyrannical, is to be foundin the fact before alluded to, that every Thingman wasfree at any time to leave the Temple and Thing of his Priest, and to join that of another. In this way public opinion might, and in many cases did manifestitself; and this carrying out of the voluntary principlein regard to the social and judicial position of the Priest, as well as in that of his purely religious functions, was some safeguard of the community againstan abuse of power. In later times, at least, whenthe office had come to be considered in the light offamily property, and could, as such, be bought andsold, this original right was acknowledged by the fact,</p>
<p>that it was usual for the incoming priest to call themen of the Thing to a meeting, and to ask whether theywere willing to place themselves under his jurisdiction. Practically, no doubt, this right to join the Thing ofanother priest was of little value in the early days ofthe settlement, except as the assertion of a principle, asit was likely to bring down on the head of the dissatisfieddependent the wrath of his superior. It follows from what has been already said, thatthe office was one of purely personal relation, and inits principle in no way depended on territory. Accidentally, and as a matter of fact, no doubt, andmore especially in early times, the common people ofa district, who had settled in the lot of a great chief, followed him territorially as well as personally ; residence and subordination were identical. But, as wehave seen, as time rolled on the island became morethickly peopled, the respect for an old house mightdwindle away, while that for a new one might spring up ; there, too, men worshipped the rising sun ; and so, inthe same district there might be two temples, which itmight be equally convenient to visit, and two priests, one weak and the other powerful ; but as defence or protection was one of the claims which the Thingman hadupon his leader, he would naturally seek the superior</p>
<p>who would be most likely to afford it to him. On theother hand, a priest might change his residence, andbuild a new temple, and yet carry his Thingmen withhim. The possession of a temple and personal powerwere all that he needed as a title to his office. In this way, by the end of the period of occupation, a number of little kingdoms had been formed all roundthe coast of Iceland, ruled by the priests, who, at statedtimes, convened their adherents and retainers to meetings for the settlement of matters which concerned anyor all of them. These were called “ Things”—Meetings.* Each was independent of the other, and quarrels betweenthe members of two separate Things could only besettled, as the quarrels of nations are settled, by treatyor war. In these foreign relations, it was the Priestwho represented the community, and treated with hisbrother priests to arrange matters ; but as yet theyacknowledged no common bond of union, save thatof race. An Icelandic state or commonwealth, in fact, did not exist.</p>
<h3>Notes</h3>
<p id="note-social-principles-1">See for this part of the subject, an essay by the same hand in the Oxford Essays, 1858, The Norsemen in Iceland, to which it may be allowed once for all to refer for a fuller sketch of the mythology of the race, as well as for many other points which cannot even be touched on here for want of space.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-2">By some the whole custom of fostering has been supposed to have arisen out of this exposure of infants. However that may be,</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-3">By a strange anomaly, just as the parent stock of the North- men both in Norway and Iceland, but first of all in Iceland, were labouring, after the introduction of Christianity, to do away with duels, their offspring in Normandy were making it still more the keystone of their system of legislation. Thus wager of battle, which was dying out in England along with the right of private war, shot up into a new and legal existence, as an appeal to the Christians’ God, under the Anglo-Norman kings ; and so the right lingered down to very recent times a remnant of heathen belief, long after the principle involved in the right had been forced to do fresh duty in a religion not of war and bloodshedding, but of peace and mercy.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-4">Thus Illugi, the brother of Grettir the great outlaw, preferred death at the hands of his murderers rather than to swear an oath to forego the revenge which he was bound to take. Thorstein, another brother, follows the assassin to Byzantium, and there takes ample re- venge. In our Saga, Njal, otherwise so peaceful and forgiving, after he became a Christian, declares that he will not leave his burning house. “ I will not go out, for I am an old man, and little fitted to avenge my sons, but I will not live on in shame.” Ch. 127, vol. ii., p. 175.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-5">In the words of the Anglo-Saxon law, where the same system prevailed, he might either &quot; buy off the spear, or bear it.&quot;</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-6">In early times it seems to have been enough if the slayer left his weapon in the wound. &quot;That,&quot; says Gísli Súr's son's Saga, &quot;men called secret manslaughter (lönvig) but not murder, if men left their weapon sticking in the wound.&quot; Compare also Palnatoki's arrow with which he slew the Danish King Harold. The feeling here seems to be that the weapon well known to belong to the slayer was his mark that the deed had been done by him.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-7">See our Saga, ch. 88, vol. ii., p. 36, where Earl Hacon wishes to put Njal's sons to death at night, but Sweyn, his son, insists that it should be put off till daylight. Still more strongly in Egil's Saga, ch. 62, Ed. Reykjavík, when Gunhillda, the mother of King Eric</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-8">Fyrir ofriki Haralds konúngs; &quot;for the overbearing of King Harold&quot; are the words invariably used.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-9">See the Eyrbyggja Saga, where Thorolf Mostrarskegg tosses his pillars, on which the image of Thor was carved, over board, off Reykjaness, and follows and finds them to Hofsvogr (Templevoe), in the Breiðifjörðr (Broadfirth). It sometimes happened, that the pillars were not easily found; in that case a temporary abode was chosen, while the pillars were sought for. The search often lasted long; thus Ingolf, the first of all the settlers, only found his pillars after three whole years had passed; Lodmund again after three years; Hrollaugr in one; and Thord Skeggi, not until he had hunted for them for ten or fifteen years.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-10">“Ken the land :” kenna landit.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-11">At fara elldi um landit.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-12">Technically his landnám, his “landtaking,” from “at nema land;” whence also the early settlers were called landnámsmenn.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-13">It may be inferred that human sacrifices were not in high favour in Iceland, first from the fact that those suspected of prac- tising such rites, were in very bad repute. Thus, Vatndales Saga, new ed., p. 28, &quot;There was a man named Thorolf, and his nick- name was Hellblade (Anglice Rakehell); he was a very unfair man and very little loved. . . . He wrought much mischief in the country round . . . and it was much misdoubted that he must be a sacrificer of men; nor was there a man in all the Dales who</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-14">At mæla fyrir minni.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-15">At strengja heit. For the feeling about them comp. Hrafn- kell’s Saga, p. 8; Kjöbenh. 1847.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-16">See the strange story of the vows made by the Vikings of Jomsborg, which led to their invasion of Norway. Formn Saga.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-17">Or hæng, for the word is spelled in both ways. The meaning of the nickname is “trout,” and all the Kettles in that famous family of Ravensfood bore it from the time that their mythical ancestor, the first Kettle hæng, slew a great dragon, and when his father asked what he had done, said, “I’m not going to make a long story out of every fish I see leap, but true it is that I chopped a bull-trout</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-18">Landnáma, 5 ch. 12.</p>
<p id="note-social-principles-19">Meeting is “ mot thing,” just as husting is “ house thing.” The one a public gathering of the freeholders of a district, the other a gathering of householders.</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">The Icelandic Commonwealth</h2>
<h3>THE ICELANDIC COMMONWEALTH.</h3>
<p>At length, about sixty years after the first settlementof the island, a step was taken towards turning Icelandinto a commonwealth, and giving the whole island alegal constitution ; and though we are ignorant of theimmediate cause which led to this, we know enough ofthe state of things in the island to feel sure, that itcould only have been with the common consent of thegreat chiefs, who, as Priests, presided over the variouslocal Things. The first want was a man who could makea code of laws ; the second was a common place of meeting. In the south-east of the island, at Lon, lived Ulfljóta man who had emigrated from Norway, and who, on themother's side, traced his descent from one of the royalhouses of that country. The choice, no doubt, fell onhim, because the men of that family were famous fortheir knowledge of the customary law, and Ulfljót betook himself to the old country to consult members ofhis house still wiser than himself. He sought the abodeof Thorleif the wise, his mother's brother, the same whoshortly afterwards assisted King Hacon, the fosterchildof our great English Athelstane, in forming the old Gula-Thing's Code. Three years he stayed abroad ; and when he returned, the chiefs, who, no doubt, day</p>
<p>by day felt more strongly the need of a common centreof action as well as of a common code, lost no time incarrying out their scheme. While Ulfljót was away, theyhad settled the most knotty part of the whole question, and that was—where the great Thing, where the commonplace of meeting should be. While Ulfljót was doing theheadwork, his fosterbrother, Grim goatshoe—a name, as Maurer remarks, probably taken from his skill as a cragsman—was doing what may be called the footwork of thescheme. He had been sent off to walk throughout thewhole island, and seek a fitting spot for the commonwealth to meet. He found it south-west of thefells, where the broad lands of a freeman,* which hadjust been confiscated for murder, gave ample spacefor the annual gathering of some thousands of souls, and where there was an abundance of wood and water, as well as forage for their horses. There then, on thatgreat sunken plain between the two Rifts, with thebright Thingvalla lake before it, and the huge Broad-</p>
<p>shield mountain looking down on it, was the Althing setin the year 929-930, and Ulfljót’s code solemnly adoptedas the law of the land. Besides the accident of the confiscation, which happened so luckily just then, respectwas no doubt paid to the natural advantages of thespot, which lies at the junction of the tracks which crossthe desert wastes which fill the heart of the country ; and some consideration was also felt for the fact that italso lay in the Thing of the priesthood founded by Ingolf, the first settler, the priest of which thus becamewhat may be termed the high-priest of the island, inasmuch as the legal capital of the country was within hisjurisdiction.* The time of the annual meeting was fixed at first forthe middle of the month of June, but in the year 999 it was agreed to meet a week later, and the Althingthen met when ten full weeks of summer had passed. Itlasted fourteen days. These Icelandic weeks began on Thursday. The first summer day was on the Thursdaywhich fell between the 9th and 15th of April, and the</p>
<p>first day of the Althing would be somewhere betweenthe 18th and 24th of June.* As all the judicial meetings of the Icelanders werein close connection with their religious rites, as Churchand State were in fact identical, there can be no doubtthat the Althing, in this point of view, was a faithfulrepresentation of the local Things. There, too, on thelavafield, seamed and scarred with the fury of volcanicfire, solemn sacrifices and great feasts were held in honourof the gods. In its legal capacity it was both a deliberative and executive assembly; both Parliament and High Court of Justice in one. There was yet no distinctionbetween these attributes of power. Of one thing wemay be quite sure, this, that it was only the great chiefs, only the priests and others of influence, who had anyvoice in either function. The Icelandic State was anaristocracy, and though there was no spot on earthwhere there were so many chiefs, and where the commonman, if one may be forgiven for playing on the words, was so uncommon, still the High Court, or Court of</p>
<p>Laws (lögretta), at the Althing, was virtually in the handsof very few persons, constituting a committee. Thiswas the “Court of Laws.” In this court the priestshad great power. They were probably members of itex officio, and each priest chose two assessors to sit in italong with him. When causes were to be tried theynamed the judges. In all trials the judges were boundto be unanimous in passing judgment. But with the Althing came a new office. In thosedays there were no books—everything was traditional ; the law itself was committed to memory and the custody of faithful lips. Time out of mind there hadexisted amongst the nations of the North, men who, like Ulfljót, had made the customary law their study, and learnt its traditional precepts by heart. There werethe lawmen or lawyers (lögmenn), a class which we shallfind still flourishing in the time of which our Saga tells. They were private persons, invested with no officialcharacter,* but who enjoyed all the influence which anexclusive knowledge of any one subject, and most of allof such a difficult subject as law, must necessarily give . * This statement is at issue with Maurer, but there is not inthe passages which he has collected with so much research any proofthat the lögmenn had an official position. They seem to have beensimply law-skilled men, “counsel,” to whom men in need of advicebetook themselves.</p>
<p>to any man in an early state of society. But when the Althing was established we first hear of a law officerproperly so called. This was what we have called the “ Speaker of the Law,” (Lögsögumaðr). His boundenduty it was to recite publicly the whole law within thespace to which the tenure of his office was limited. Tohim, too, all who were in need of a legal opinion, or ofinformation as to what was and was not law, had a rightto turn during the meeting of the Althing. To him asort of presidency or precedence at the Althing was conceded; but with a care whieh marks how jealously theyoung Republic guarded itself against bestowing too greatpower on its chief officer ; he was expressly excludedfrom all share in the executive ; and his tenure of officewas restricted to three years, though he might be reelected at the end of that period.* On the whole, therefore, as Maurer well remarks, the office was a mosthonourable one, but except for the fortnight duringwhich the sittings of the Althing lasted, it was, comparedto the substantial power of the priests, both individuallyand as a body, one of little weight and influence. Itwas something, however, to have the whole control of</p>
<p>the law of the land during the annual fortnight to whichthe legal existence of the commonwealth was limited. See, for instance, Thorgeir’s power at the Change of Faith, and Skapti’s decisions as to the law at the trialfor the Burning. : With regard to the contents and extent of Ulfljót’scode, we have little information. We are told that itbegan with religious precepts, like the later Christiancodes, and one of those injunctions, which may well provoke a smile, and which tells how superstitious the Icelanders were, has been handed down.* Anothercontained the order of proceedings, and the form of oathto be taken in the temples in judicial trials and suits. Every temple must contain a ring of at least two ouncesin weight, and which the priest was to bear on his armat all meetings where business of like nature was transacted. Every one who appeared before the court asparty, witness, or judge, had to swear an oath on it, afterit had been duly sprinkled with the blood of a victim,— “ So help him Njord, Frey, and the Almighty God,” thathis cause, witness, or judgment was, to the best of hisbelief, right and just. It would, indeed, be unreason-</p>
<p>able to imagine that the code contained much more thana collection of formularies for criminal prosecutions andcivil suits, or that the memory of the earliest Speaker ofthe Law was more heavily burdened than with the recollection of those first elements of legislation. Ulfljót, aswas right and fitting, was the first Speaker of the Law.*</p>
<p>With the establishment of the Althing we have for thefirst time a Commonwealth in Iceland. The Temples and Things and Courts of the Priests are no longer placesfor the transaction of the civil and religious business ofseparate communities, ruled by the heads of influentialfamilies, they are now subordinate parts of one State, andthe centre of unity and supreme power was transferredto the Althing, as the civil and religious capital of theisland. The first great blow had been struck at the patri-</p>
<p>archal system and the voluntary principle ; but thoughthe priests lost something in the way of their independentpower, and sunk in theory from little kings to sheriffs, they were amply compensated in practice by the introduction of a system which left their real influence in theirlocal districts pretty much where it was, while it threwthe Court of Laws, the very power which was superiorto, and supposed to regulate their authority, into thehands of a committee chosen out of, or at least by, theirown body.</p>
<h3>PROVINCIAL ORGANIZATION.</h3>
<p>So things went on for about thirty years, when a verygreat step in social progress occurred, and along withit a corresponding change in the constitution of the Althing itself. This was the establishment of an organizedprovincial constitution of the country, by its division into Quarters or Provinces, each containing a certain numberof local Things, each of which again contained a certainnumber of Priesthoods. The necessity of this arrangementhad no doubt long been felt, but the immediate causeof its adoption was a bloody feud which arose out of theburning of one Blundkettle. This event is said to havehappened in the year 962. It was the leading case offire-raising before that of Njal. Up to that time thecustomary law had prescribed that all suits were to be</p>
<p>pleaded in the Thing that lay nearest to the spot wherethe cause of action arose. Instead of following up thefeud by revenge, the relations of the murdered man hadpursued it at law ; but when they came to plead it atthe nearest Thing, their adversaries, who lived close to thecourt, mustered in great force, and would not allow thetrial to come on. Now, the plaintiffs betook themselvesto the Althing, as the Supreme Court, but there again thesame scenes of violence occurred, the two sides came toblows, and many were slain, and though the plaintiffs hadthe best of the battle, the case was one that notoriouslydemanded legislative interference. Thord Gellir, therefore, a great chief, called on the Court of Laws to providea remedy for a state of things which enjoined that a manmust seek his lawful rights in the heart of his enemy'scountry, and just in the very place where he was leastlikely to obtain them. To meet this difficulty, then, the island was dividedinto four Quarters (Fjórðungr), named sometimes from thepoints of the compass, and sometimes from the geographical features which that part of the country presented. Thus we hear indifferently of the Northlanders' Quarter, orthe Eyjafirthers' Quarter; of the Westfirthers' Quarter, orthe Broadfirthers' Quarter ; of the Southlanders' Quarter, or the Rangriver Quarter; and we also hear of an East-</p>
<p>firthers’ Quarter. Each of these Quarters was next subdivided into three judicial districts (þingsoknir), theinhabitants of each of which had a common place ofmeeting (Thing), and were bound to attend the same localcourt. In the Northlanders’ Quarter there were four ofthese districts, because, when the subdivision was to becarried into effect, while the great Things of Eyjafirthand Skagafirth, which lay in the middle of the Quarter, were necessarily maintained, the dwellers to the east ofthe first, and to the west of the other, refused to go sofar to a common place of meeting. But as we shall see, this was merely a provincial arrangement, and in theeyes of the central authority, the four Northland Thingsonly reckoned as three. Each of those Quarters hadits Quarter Thing (Fjórðungsþing), and each of its subdivisions had its Vernal Thing (Várþing), in which certainsuits were in the first place set on foot, then carried to the Quarter Court, and thence, if need were, to the Althing. Furthermore, in each of the subdivisions there werethree chief temples (höfuðhof), mother churches as weshould call them, to which the most distinguished persons holding priesthoods (goðorð) in each subdivisionwere chosen. Thus we have three Priesthoods to each local Thing, and three local Things to each Quarter Thing, and four</p>
<p>Quarter Things to the whole island, as represented at the Althing. But with this arrangement came a change in theconstitution of powers at the Althing itself. Up tothis time there had been but one supreme body or committee at the Althing, the Court of Laws or Lögretta, which combined the functions of a deliberative andlegislative assembly, with those of a Supreme Court. Now the executive and deliberative were separatedfrom the judicial attributes. The Court of Laws retainedthe former, while the latter were distributed among four Courts, representing the four Quarters, and before whichall suits brought before the Althing relating to those Quarters had to be pleaded. For the rest, the judges inthose courts were named by the priests as before, andthey themselves all sat, now perhaps for the first timeas a body, in the Court of Laws itself. With regard to the Priesthoods themselves, it isplain that a great change now took place. Their numberwas now limited. There could now be but thirty-sixpriesthoods recognised by the State throughout thewhole island; or if regard were had to the peculiararrangement in the north, thirty-nine. We say priesthoods, because the office, by the subdivision of property, could now be held by several persons at once, though</p>
<p>the State only recognised their acts as the acts of one. Again, though any one who had means and influenceenough might still build a temple and gather followersand Thingmen around him; still, his new temple wouldnot be one of the recognised temples, and he would notbe a priest in the sense required by the Constitution. His temple in fact would be a Temple of Ease, it wouldnot be a mother Temple, or as we should say, a motheror parish church, and though it was allowed to exist, it existed without any legal rights as part of themachinery of civil government. The institution, therefore, while it gave to the greater portion of, and it may beto all, the old temples exclusive rights, and was thuscalculated to strengthen the power of each priest whosetemple had now a legal existence, taught him, at thesame time, to look to the State rather than to the familyfor the title-deeds of his right. The second great blow, in short, had been struck at the patriarchal, and, alongwith it, at the voluntary system. The State was extending its power and authority from the national centre tothe provinces, and binding them still closer to itself. With regard to the way in which the grievance ofwhich Thord Gellir complained, was remedied, it lay inthis. Up to that time, each priesthood had possessed acourt of its own, and after that time continued to pos-</p>
<p>sess it, but only as a private court, something like thoseof our Lords of the Manor. But henceforth, at the bidding of the central power, the Thingmen of three priesthoods met in one Vernal Thing, and thus the plaintiff orthe defendant might hope for a better chance of justicefrom an assembly presided over by several chiefs, thanif he had to sue for it at the hands of one priest and hisdependents, whom the very fact that gave rise to hissuit had made his enemy. Under the old state of thingsthe priest could hardly fail to have a leaning to one sideor the other, and justice could not be even-handed. These Spring Things, therefore, answered well, and wehear much of them. Of the Quarter Things (Fjórðungs- þing), which must be most carefully distinguished fromthe Quarter Courts at the Althing (Fjórðungsdómr), wehear less, and it is probable that they went into disuse, from the fact that if it were impossible to obtain adecision at the Spring Thing, or court of first instance, the suit would be carried at once to the Quarter Courtat the Althing, as the highest tribunal. For the rest, the Spring Thing was a pattern of the Althing on alittle scale; each had its Thingbrekka, or Hill of Laws, where certain notices and proclamations were given, there, too, the judges were bound to be unanimous intheir sentences, and there too, the time-honoured number</p>
<p>of judges was maintained, since each of the three priestswho presided in turn named twelve judges, thirty-sixin all; for as the words of the law ran, “three twelveswere to judge in all suits.” Besides the Vernal Thing, there was an autumn court, (Leið*) also held by the three priests of the district. Itmet fourteen days after the Althing was over, lastedtwo days, and was a court of information and execution, in order that matters which had been decided atthe Althing might be carried into effect, and broughtbefore the notice of freemen, who for any reasonhad been unable to undertake the annual journeyto the Althing. Like every other legally constitutedassembly, other matters might be lawfully broughtbefore it. Under the new system, we have certain informationas to the constitution of the Court of Laws, so dark inthe first days of the Althing. First of all, the thirtynine priests sate in it (36 + 3) ; but in order to counterbalance the preponderance of the three extra priests fromthe north, three men were chosen from each of thethree other Quarters by the priests who represented it, so that the whole number on the bench of the priestswas forty-eight (39 + 9). Each of these forty-eight</p>
<p>chose two men as his assessors, who sate, the one on abench before, and the other on a bench behind him, hehimself sitting on the middle bench. The whole Courtof Laws consisted therefore of 144, and reckoningthe Speaker of the Laws, who now sate in it as president, of 145 persons.* With regard to voting, each memberexercised an equal right. With regard to the four Quarter Courts (Fjórðungsdómr), they were so constituted ; each priest namedone judge for each of the four courts, four thereforein all, out of the frequenters of his Thing ; but asthe priests of the North Quarter were to have no peculiar privileges, and as it is expressly stated that thirtysix judges were named from each Quarter, it is plainthat each of the priests from that Quarter could onlyname three instead of four men as judges. According to this calculation, each Quarter Court consistedof thirty-six judges ; so that here again the timehonoured three twelves meet us, and the whole numberof judges named for the four Quarter Courts is 144, or exactly the same number as those entitled to sit inthe Court of Laws.</p>
<h3>Notes</h3>
<p id="note-commonwealth-1">The name of the murdered man was Kol, and that of the murderer Thorir cropbeard. They were a bad family. Thorwalld cropbeard, a grandson of Thorir, settled afterwards in the east country, and there burnt his own brother Gunnar in his house. He was also with Flosi at Njal’s burning, and was killed in the battle at the Althing. See Snorri’s words to Flosi on the occasion, ch. 144, vol. ii. p. 275.</p>
<p id="note-commonwealth-2">The Icelandic term is Allsherjargoði—“The priest of the whole host”—under whom the whole host or body of men at the Thing for the time stood. So also the Alþing is called Allsherjar- þing; and goods or property confiscated to the commonwealth Allsherjarfé.</p>
<p id="note-commonwealth-3">After the subversion of the Republic, the opening of the Althing was advanced to the feast of St. Peter and St. Paul, that is, to the 29th of June, and at later times, to the 3d and 5th of July. The Althing continued to meet annually on the old spot till 1800, when it was abolished. In 1845 it was restored, but it now sits at Reykjavík.</p>
<p id="note-commonwealth-4">It is true that many of the Speakers of the Law were re- elected over and over again, but the principle of the right to make a fresh choice was always asserted.</p>
<p id="note-commonwealth-5">This was the injunction to the captains of ships to take off the frightful figure-heads of their ships when they made the coast, lest the guardian spirits of the land should be scared.</p>
<p id="note-commonwealth-6">We are not told whether Ulfljót received any other reward for his skill in legislation; his foster-brother Grim got, for his trouble in finding out the best spot for the Althing, a penny (penning) from every household in the island, which he generously made over to the temples. The following is the list of the Speakers of the Law for the first hundred years :—Ulfljót, Rafn Heing's son, 930-949; Thor- arinn Ragi's brother, 950-969; Thorkell máni, 970-984; Thorgeir the priest of Lightwater, 985-1001; Grim Sverting's son, 1002- 1003; and Skapti Thorod's son, 1004-1030. Almost all of these are mentioned in the Njal's Saga. We may add, that after all, there is some doubt whether Ulfljót ever held the office, as in some lists his name is omitted altogether. In any case, his tenure of office could hardly have lasted more than one year.</p>
<p id="note-commonwealth-7">Compare the English “Leet.”</p>
<p id="note-commonwealth-8">In later times the bishops were added, but in the days of which we write there were no bishops in Iceland.</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">Chief Settlers in the South-West</h2>
<h3>CHIEF SETTLERS IN THE SOUTH-WEST.</h3>
<p>After these necessary details we may now turn toour story. In the south-west of Iceland lay a districtwhich soon attracted the eyes of the Northmen bent onsettlement. This was the fertile alluvial plain whichlies between the great rivers, Thursowater and Markfleet,* and which is watered by the two Rangrivers andmany lesser streams. In those days Hekla had not asyet burst forth in fire and flame, no showers of sand orfloods of lava had marred or seamed the beauty of theland, which is still so fruitful after centuries of volcanicaction. Nor had Markfleet, worst enemy of all, eateninto the bosom of the plain which runs up miles fromthe seashore, and torn it asunder, to seek the sea bymany shifting mouths. He still swept onward to themain, sharp round the spurs of the Eyjafalla Jokul, though in time of flood he threw off some of his strengthto swell the channel called Thverá (Crosswater), in whichthe streams which ran down from the uplands werecaught and carried away to join Thursowater just beforeit falls into the sea.† This fair expanse, then covered</p>
<p>with wood up to the fells, caught the eye of Kettle hæing, a man from Naumdale in Norway, who fled the land in 887 for manslaughter’s sake. With him came his fosterbrother Baug, and between them they seized, or ratherch. iii., the stream in words that admit of no mistake, that therewas such a channel in early times; and besides, the term Landisles (landeyjar) implies that the whole space between Thurswater and Markfleet was severed from the rest of the district by some suchchannel. The view has been adopted in the text which seems mostlikely to meet the case. The following very interesting descriptionof this part of the country is from the pen of Mr. Metcalfe, B.D., of Lincoln College, Oxford, who made a lengthened tour in Icelandduring the last summer (1860), and has kindly communicated it tothe writer:— “The Delta enclosed between the Markarfljót and the Thverá, and cut into two parts by the Affall, is a vast plain, which extendswestward farther than the eye can reach, beyond the Thiorsá to the Olfusá. As I stood by the house at Hliðarendi, I saw a dark speckin the distance, which I learnt was Bergthorsknoll. One or twoother specks, scattered over the expanse, are also farms, and thereis nothing else visible to break the utter flatness of the scene inthat direction. “ Breiðabolstaðr, Teigr, and Hliðarendi, lie all of them some hundred feet or so above the dead flat, while behind them the moorlandrises upwards, backed at the Hliðarendi end by the fine mountain ofthe Thríhyrníngr. “ Just under Hliðarendi, to the south, is the miserable remnantof the flat fertile level, which made the spot so dear in Gunnar’s eyes. It is not many feet above the bed of Thverá, which has graved itselfinto the bank to within a few yards of the ascent on which thehouse stands. When I saw the Thverá it was not very large, but</p>
<p>Kettle seized it, for he was the leader, all the mightytract between the two rivers, and this is said to be aboutthe largest landnám or lot ever taken by any of the oldsettlers. It took long to fill it, nor was it till about thethe great strips of loam, half severed from the bank and covered withgrass, showed what the stream can do in its more savage moods. &quot; A mere mountain torrent descends the slope just east of Hlíðarendi, in cascades, Thverá by name, and it no doubt has giventhe name to the branch of Markarfljót, which it joins just below. &quot; The chief body of water, I was told, sometimes takes one, sometimes another of the three channels. It is supposed (and I think with much probability), that in Njal's time the Markarfljót wasone river, and that it wound round the base of the heights which support the Eyjafell Jokul, while the Rauðaskriður (Stóra Dímon), whichrises darkly from the flat, lay near to, but on the Hlíðarendi side &quot; East of Hlíðarendi the Delta contracts into a valley, and thetriple stream soon becomes one, bounded on the south by the glaciersof Eyjafell Jokul, north by the slopes from the Tindafell Jokul, whilethe end is apparently blocked up by the Godalands Jokul. A grandscene ! &quot; A Danish mile up the valley is the supposed site of Njal'sbothy (sel). Close by the house at Hlíðarendi is Gunnar's so-calledcairn, where he is said to be buried. &quot; It took me three hours to ride from Breiðabolstaðr to Bergthorsknoll, after crossing the Thverá, the banks of which are quitelow. I crossed some wet sand, into which the horses sank, causedby overflows of Thverá, which six years ago flooded a vast extent ofcountry. We kept east, to avoid the worst morasses, and joinedthe Affall, by the right bank of which we entered on the hardground.</p>
<p>end of sixty years, that is to say, till about the end of thelandnámtide, or period of occupation, that it was fullyinhabited. We then find the descendants of Kettleliving at Hof, at “the Temple,” and we have already</p>
<p>“ Bergthorsknoll lies within sight of the breakers dashing againstthe flat shore. It lies on an elevation of a longish shape, at thesouth-east. This elevation terminates abruptly about a bow-shot fromthe Affall, and behind it no doubt Flosi hid the horses. Nearer tothe river is a squarish depression, called Flosi’s lág, where traditionsays the horses were pastured; it is artificial, and of no depth; formerly they say it was deeper. On the opposite side of theknoll is what is called Kari’s pond, a mere puddle.”</p>
<p>In another communication, in answer to one from the writer asking for information as to the channel by which Grjotá and Thverá (the hill-stream) found their way to the sea before the greater Thverá (Cross-stream) existed, Mr. Metcalfe adds:—</p>
<p>“ I crossed the Griotá and lesser Thverá on the flat moor belowthe slope I mentioned, on the verge of which are the farms. As faras I observed, the river into which they flow has bent considerablyto the south before they join it; but I cannot say that I observedthis matter particularly; neither did I see their junction with it. I should imagine, that in ancient times they had a small channel oftheir own after their junction with each other, and that that channelran very likely pretty much where the greater Thverá river nowflows.</p>
<p>“ I can easily imagine ice or detritus from the mountains in thespring blocking up and impeding the Markarfljót, when roundingthe shore under the farm of Mörk, and a good deal of the river thustaking what is in reality a straighter channel, which, after a shortspace, would bring it into company with the two mountain torrents above mentioned.”</p>
<p>seen that his son Rafn was the first Speaker of the Law. Baug Kettle’s foster brother, who is said to have beenan Irishman by birth, settled by Hæng’s advice, at ráði Hængs, in Fleetlithe, that is, on the fruitful slope orlithe, as it would be called in some parts of England, which rose toward the fell from the level plain. Here at Lithend (Hlíðarendi) at the end of the slope, he built hima house, and had three sons, Gunnar, Eyvind, and Stein. Late in the days of Kettle, who was not a young manwhen he came to Iceland, a man of rank and worth, named Sighvat the red, of Helgeland in Norway, cameand settled on a portion of his landnám, and became agreat chief. He set up his abode at Breidabolstede, westof Markfleet. His son was Sigmund. It so happenedthat Sigmund Sighvat’s son, and Stein Baug’s son, bothwanted to cross the ferry at Sandhol at one and the sametime. When they reached the river’s bank a quarrelsprung up between the two bands. Sigmund and hismen drove Stein’s house-carles from the ferry boat, andduring the scuffle Stein came up and smote Sigmunda blow which proved his death. This, which happened about the year 930, or justwhen the Althing was established, was the beginningof a mighty feud which lasted for ten years. The suitmust have been followed up at law by Sigmund’s next</p>
<p>of kin, for all the sons of Baug, and therefore all musthave had a hand in the fray, were banished from the Fleetlithe, but they removed to abodes only a little wayoff. Sigmund had three sons, Mord, Sigfus, and Lambi; and two daughters, Rannveiga and Thorgerda. Thorgerda was married to Önund the little, who lived in Flói, as the rich district between Thursowater and Olvuswater was called. The house in which Stein hadset up his abode was near to Flói, and Thorgerda couldnot bear that her father's slayer should live so nearher unscathed. She goaded on Önund to avenge him. He set out with thirty men, set fire to the homestead, and when Stein gave himself up, led him out to the topof a hill and there slew him. Gunnar Stein's brother, asnext of kin, now had the blood feud against Önund. He had made a good marriage, for his wife Hrafnhildawas a grand-daughter of Kettle hæng, and her brother Orm the strong was one of the most daring men of thetime. They seem, however, to have pursued the feud atfirst at law, for Önund was made an outlaw for slaying Stein; and though he guarded himself well, and set themat defiance for two winters, at last, one Yule, they caughthim in an unwary moment when he was returning fromthe games, and slew him with three of his men. As Gunnar rode back towards Thursowater he fell dead off</p>
<p>his horse from his wounds. When Önund’s sons grewup they betook themselves for legal advice to theiruncle, Mord Sigmund’s son, as to how the feud shouldbe followed up at law ; but he, whom we shall knowafterwards as the first lawyer of his time, said the thingcould not be done, as their father had been made anoutlaw. They might take revenge if they could. Örn, a kinsman of Gunnar, who had betrayed their father, and who was their next door neighbour, came handiestto them. On some question of pasture rights, no doubtwith the help of Mord’s legal skill, they got him made anoutlaw everywhere except on his own land and a bowshotout of it. So they watched and watched for him, but hekept within bounds and never gave them a chance. Atlast they drove a herd of neat over his fields, and in hishurry to chase them out, he overstepped his limit ; theyrose from their ambush and slew him, and thought noharm could happen to them as he was an outlaw ; but Thorleif flash, Örn’s brother, got a famous bowman, Thormod Thiostar’s son, to shoot a shaft from Örn’sboundary towards the spot where he had been slain, andthe arrow fell beyond it. Örn, therefore, was unlawfullyslain, for he had fallen within a bow-shot of his own land, and stood free to his next of kin to follow up the quarrelat law. Thorleif flash and Hamond Gunnar’s son, set the</p>
<p>suit on foot, while Mord stood by his nephew. Owing nodoubt to Mord’s skill, it was settled that they should payno fine but be banished out of the Flói district. By thehelp of Mord, they were set up in other parts of thecountry, and the feud ended by Mord’s betrothing hissister Rannveiga to Hamond Gunnar’s son. Hamond thenreturned to the old house, which Baug, his grandfather, had built on the Fleetlithe, and there at Lithend wasborn the peerless Gunnar of Lithend, for whom, in goodness of heart, strength of body, and skill in arms, noman was ever a match in Iceland.* Close to Lithend,</p>
<p>at Gritwater (Grjotá), one of the mountain streamswhich ran from the uplands into the plain, lived Sigfus, the brother of Rannveiga and Mord. He had sevensons. They were Gunnar's first cousins, and play agreat part in our story. Kettle, one of the brothers, andby far the best of them, lived at the Mark east of Markfleet. We must now speak of a settler of another sex. This was Asgerda, the daughter of Lord Ar or Ask thesilent. In his struggle for power Harold Fairhair hadput her husband to death, a man of rank, and a hersir, that is lord, baron, in Romsdale. Asgerda then left theland, taking her sons Thorgeir Gollnir and Thorold, with her. She settled on land east of Markfleet, between Auldustein and Selialandsmull, and she married, a secondtime, Thorgeir of Hordaland, who had gone to Icelandfrom Drontheim, and was settled at Holt under Eyja-</p>
<p>attributed to him by Landnáma, but that he was in fact their brother. This would get over the difficulty of time; but the authorityof Landnáma is so venerable that its assertions are not lightly tobe disregarded, and we may find a loophole for escape, if we suppose, as indeed is suggested by Guðbrandr Vigfússon himself, that Sighvat the red, like many other of the first settlers, had childrenby a former marriage before he left Norway, that Sigmund was oneof those children, and that Rannveiga the first was only his stepmother.</p>
<p>HOLT-THORIR AND NJAL. lxxvii</p>
<p>fells. The son of Asgerda by Thorgeir was Holt-Thorirand his son was Thorgeir Craggeir.* In that family wasthe priesthood to the east of Markfleet. Thorgeir Gollnir, her eldest son, settled at Bergthorsknoll, in whatwere called the Land Isles, the alluvial flat between themouths of the rivers Thurso and Markfleet, and therewas born, about 930, the hero of our story, Njal, thegreat lawyer and the foresighted man.</p>
<p>We must still speak of one or two more families. Beyond Markfleet, to the east again, settled Rafn thefoolish, “one of the noblest born of men.” He came outabout 900, already an old man ; his son was Jorund thepriest, and he, not content with his lands and priesthoodthere away east, settled in the old landnám fashion, ona lot at Swertingsstede, west of Markfleet. He musthave been a man of worth and wealth, for he married Thorlauga, the daughter of Rafn, the Speaker of the Law,</p>
<p>a granddaughter of Kettle hæing. On Rafn’s death without sons Jorund succeeded, in right of his wife, to theestates at Hof, where stood the mother temple of thedistrict, and he thus became doubly a priest. His sonswere Valgard the guileful and Wolf Aurpriest. Thelatter, on the death of his father, took the priesthood eastof Markfleet, which was afterwards called the Daledweller’s Priesthood, because the head of the familylived at a homestead called “ the Dale,” and there, afterthe death of Wolf, lived his son, Runolf of the Dale.</p>
<p>The fortunes of the western branch of Jorund’shouse were still more bright; for at a later period Valgard the guileful, who had succeeded to the estate andpriesthood at Hof, by a marriage after his father’s example, with Unna Mord’s daughter, and Sighvat thered’s great-grandchild, became possessed of the priesthood of the Rangriver Vales, and so almost the wholeof Kettle hæng’s great lot or landnám returned to thehands of one family.</p>
<p>Late in the Landnámtide came out Kettlebjörn theold. He was of the royal race of Helgeland. He marriedthe daughter of Thord Skeggi, one of the first settlers, and was famous for a ship called Ellidi, which he owned. He settled up the country to the east of Thursowater, and took as his own Laugardale and the Tongues, and</p>
<p>KETTLEBJÖRN THE OLD. lxxix</p>
<p>dwelt at Mossfell. Teit was his son, and Thorhalla, Thorgerda, and Thurida his daughters. Teit had a son, Gizur the white, who lived at Mossfell, and a daughter, Jorunna, who was married to Ellidagrim, who came fromthe north country to settle down on Teit’s estates, andwho lived at Tongue after marrying his daughter. Theirson was Asgrim Ellidagrim’s son. Thorgerda was themother of Geir the priest, who lived at the Lithe, notfar from Bridgewater (Brúará). Of Teit’s family Jorunnamust have been much the eldest, for Asgrim the nephewwas younger than his uncle Gizur.*</p>
<p>Hallkell Kettlebjörn’s half-brother by the mother’sside, came out sometime after him, and challenged a mannamed Grim, who had taken the whole district called Grimsness as his lot, to give up his land or fight. Grim fought and fell, and Hallkell took his land. Hisson was Scarf (the cormorant), and his grandson was Otkell, whom we shall meet in the story.</p>
<p>We must now ask the reader to leave this district inthe south-west, on which we have dwelled so long, andfollow us to the Western Dales, round the head of Hvammsfirth. Here a woman, and a mighty woman, had been the first settler. This was Aud the deeply</p>
<p>wealthy, who, when her son Thorstein the red was slainby the Scots, over a portion of whose country he hadbeen king, set sail for Iceland, took all the Dale countryat the top of Hvammsfirth, and set up her abode at Hvamm. She was old when she came, but still lived several years, and died on the wedding-day of the youngestof her grandchildren, whom she had brought out with herafter their father's death. This was about 908-10. Shemarried one named Thorgerda soon after she came outto Kolli, a Norwegian, who was called Dalakol or Dale-Kolli, and his son was Hauskuld. On Kolli's death, Thorgerda, who seems to have been of a roving turn likeher grandmother, went abroad to Norway, and theremarried Herjolf, by whom she had a son, Hrut, who wasprobably much younger than his half-brother, as wefind him overliving him many years.*</p>
<h3>Notes</h3>
<p id="note-chief-settlers-1">Þjórsá ok Markarfljót.</p>
<p id="note-chief-settlers-2">It has been thought by some that Thverá did not exist in Njal's time, but it is plain from Landnáma, which mentions, Pt. 5,</p>
<p id="note-chief-settlers-3">This narrative is taken from Landnáma, p. 5, ch. iii. and iv. It will be remarked, that in giving the genealogy of Rannveiga, Gunnar’s mother, Njála omits all notice of Sigmund, but says that she was the daughter of Sigfus, the son of Sighvat the red, who was slain at Sandhol Ferry. This is plainly wrong, for it was Sig- mund, and not Sigfus, who was slain there, and Rannveiga was the sister of Mord and Sigfus, and therefore could not have been her brother’s child. There is, however, a difficulty to restoring Sig- mund with Landnáma to the missing branch in the genealogy, because Sighvat the red only reached Iceland about the year 900. He then married Rannveiga (whom we may call the first, to dis- tinguish her from Rannveiga the second, Gunnar’s mother), and as Mord was a grown man about 930, it would be almost impossible that Rannveiga should be his grandmother. Guðbrandr Vigfússon, in his excellent essay on the Chronology of the old Icelandic Sagas— “ Um Tímatal í Íslendinga Sögum i Fornöld ” (Safn Til Sögu Íslands gefið út af hinu Íslenzka Bókmentafélagi, Kaupmannahöfn, 1855)— is inclined to think that Sigmund was not the father of the children</p>
<p id="note-chief-settlers-4">According to this genealogy Thorgeir Craggeir and Njal were brothers’ children, first cousins. One would almost suspect that a leaf had dropped off the family tree here between Holt-Thorir and Thorgeir Craggeir, for Thorgeir must have been at least thirty years younger than Njal. He was a famous man at the time of the Burning, for he had already done that daring deed of which Kari speaks, chap. 145, vol. ii. pp. 287; but he is not described as an elderly man. Njal, on the other hand, born about 930, must have been nearly if not quite 80 in 1011.</p>
<p id="note-chief-settlers-5">Guðbrandr Vigfússon, Um Tímatal, pp. 293, makes Gizur out to have been thirty years younger than his sister.</p>
<p id="note-chief-settlers-6">Hauskuld died, as we know from Njála, in 986 or thereabouts; but Hrut, who, in spite of his misfortune with Unna, had two other wives, one probably before, and the other after her, lived on till after the close of the century. Though it was not fated that he should have children by Unna, he had by his other wives sixteen sons and ten daughters; and once he rode to the Althing, as Laxdæla tells us, with fourteen full-grown sons at his back, and that was thought a grand sight. When he was over seventy, about 995, he slew a man named Eldgrim, and so kept up his fame as a good swordsman to the end of his life.</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">Chronology and Outline of the Story</h2>
<h3>THE STORY.</h3>
<p>We have now briefly shown the degrees of kinshipin which the great families stood which play a principalpart in our story. When it begins, Mord the grandsonof Sighvat the red—or his son, if Sigmund is to dropfrom the family tree—was the greatest of all the chiefsin the south-west. Born about 910, he was in the heightof his strength and influence when, about 940, he broughtabout the settlement which put an end to the bloody feudwhich had raged among the cousins on the Fleetlithe. The quarrel, which had begun by the thirst for revengefelt by his elder sister Thorgerda, ended with his bestowing the hand of Rannveiga the youngest on the sonof the man who had taken the lead against him; and inthe birth of the peerless Gunnar we see the fruit of thatreconciliation. From that period he went on adding tohis power. Mord was such a lawyer “that no judgmentswere thought lawful unless he had a hand in them.” He was so eloquent and sweet spoken that he was calledthe Fiddle. Though Rafn, the Speaker of the Law, Kettle hæng’s grandson, lived close to him at Hof, themother temple of the district, Mord is mentioned as oneof the greatest chiefs in the south country about 940,</p>
<p>while no notice whatever is taken of Rafn. Ulfljót’scode was still young, and we may be sure that his wisehead had much to do with bringing it into workingorder. His lands were broad and fruitful, and his onlydaughter Unna, the best bred and most courteous ofwomen, might well be called the greatest match in allthe Vale country.</p>
<p>Having said so much, the teller of the story, inorder to clear the ground before him, rushes away tothe west, to speak of the half-brothers Hauskuldand Hrut; of the stalwart father and the foresighteduncle, who, besides his gifts of wit, was one of the bestswordsmen of his time; and of the fair child withlong locks playing before them on the floor; and howthe father’s joy in the beauty and stature of his childwas marred by the prophecy of the uncle, who foresawthe wilful reckless character of the girl, who would stopat no wickedness to work her will, and foretold thedisgrace which she was about to bring upon her noblerace. No wonder that the brothers saw little of oneanother for a while after such a cruel utterance.*</p>
<p>The ill seed which was to bear such a bitter crop soonbegan to spring up. Her father seems indeed to havedone everything to forward the fatal growth; tired withher wilful temper, he gave her away when a mere child, about 955, when she could not have been more thanfifteen years old, to a man whom she thought beneathher in rank. They lived together but one year, when Thiostolf’s pole-axe parted them. Her second match, which took place in 959, was more to her liking, andher father and uncle, warned by the fate of Thorwald, now let her betroth herself; but though she loved Glum, and behaved well at first, the old leaven shewed</p>
<p>to bring the half-brothers as speedily as possible into the woof of histale, he breaks the chronological order, and tells of Hrut’s betrothalto Unna, his going abroad for his inheritance, his love passages with Gunhilda, his roving exploits, return home, marriage with, and parting from Unna, and his quarrel with Mord at the Althing, beforehe speaks Hallgerda’s marriages. But she was really married before Hrut went abroad, and was a widow the second time, and living at Laugarness when Hrut returned. Chapters ix. to xvii., both inclusive, ought therefore to come in between chapters i. and ii.; and the Saga then runs on, year for year, in unbroken chronological order, tillthe Change of Faith occurs, the chapters relating to which are, seemingly by mere carelessness of the copyist, misplaced in the original. Ithas been deemed right to restore them in the translation to their trueconnection; but as the chapters relating to Hallgerda’s marriagesseem to have been so placed by the Sagateller for a sufficient reason, they have been left as they stand in the original.</p>
<p>itself as soon as Thiostolf the mischief-maker crossed Glum’s threshold; husband and wife quarrelled, and, again Thiostolf’s axe set Hallgerda free. Twice a widowand barely twenty, with much wealth which she had gotfrom her father and last husband, she remained singletill she was thirty-five. Meantime, much had passed inthe family, Hrut was betrothed to Unna, Fiddle Mord’sdaughter, and went abroad 963, returned in 965, married Unna, was parted from her 968, disputed with herfather about her portion at the Althing, and challengedhim to fight in 969.* In 970, or perhaps in the following year, Gunnar of Lithend, who was born about 945, comes into the story; he took up his cousin Unna’scause, and forced Hrut to restore Unna’s goods. When Mord died, 970-71, the great lawyer of the south, anothergreater than he was ready to fill his place, this was Njal, the man round whom the whole story turns. He wasborn about 930-935, nor do we hear much about him, ashe was a man of peace and law, in a lawless blood-thirsty</p>
<p>age, till we find him with his fame full grown, andhis weird foresight and legal skill acknowledged byall, about the time that Gunnar undertook his daringride to the west to learn how to summon Hrut fromthe lips of Hrut himself, 971. From that time to theday of his death, he was Gunnar's faithful friend; andthough he gave many men wholesome counsel, whichstood them in good stead in law suits and worldlybusiness, to no one did he feel himself more boundto afford help than to Gunnar. In 972, Gunnar goesabroad at Njal's advice—wins fame and wealth— returns 974—rides, as soon as he comes back, to the Althing against Njal's advice—falls in love with Hallgerda, who must have been about five years older thanhimself, he thirty and she thirty-five—makes up hisquarrel with Hrut and Hauskuld—marries the widow, and brings her home to Lithend. Njal's forebodings quickly came to pass. Hallgerdasoon quarrels with Bergthora, Njal's high-spirited, bravehearted wife. Now came a run of five years,* eachmarked by manslaughters committed by one houseagainst the other. It is all the womens work, and</p>
<p>nothing can shake the friendship of Njal and Gunnar, who pay blood fine after blood fine for thrall, freedman, and kinsman, as the deeds of blood ascend in the socialscale, and are good friends again. Now we hear of Njal's sons, and the terrible Skarphedinn* stalks acrossthe stage with his axe, the ogress of war (Rimmugýgr),† uplifted to his shoulder. After Sigmund's death, whowas Gunnar's first cousin,‡ the heads of the houses saw</p>
<p>little of one another, and there was coolness betweentheir families, till after three years Gunnar fell into astrait, out of which he required Njal’s help to set himfree. Then it was that the root of their old friendshipshot up into new life. There can be little doubt thatthis strait was that dastard’s deed which Hrut’s foresight had seen in the child’s eyes as Hallgerda playedabout on the floor. Now the thief’s eyes come out, and Hallgerda commits the housebreaking and fireraising at Otkell’s house at Kirkby. This happened in 982. True it was that Otkell was a weak and foolishman, made still more weak and foolish by the spitefulcounsel of the liar Skamkell, but he was, as we haveseen, a man of great family. The men of Mossfellwere near of kin to him, for he and Gizur the whitewere first cousins, and not Gizur alone, but Asgrim Ellidagrim’s son, and Geir the priest of Lithe werehis cousins also, so that Hallgerda’s wickedness, aidedby Otkell’s folly, raised up this mighty league againstthe matchless Gunnar. In 984 the suit for the theftwas settled at the Althing to Gunnar’s honour; nextspring, 985, Otkell rode over Gunnar as he was sowingin his field. A little after, just before the Althing, Gunnar slays Otkell and Skamkell by Rangriver. Atthe Althing Gunnar and Gizur the white strive. That</p>
<p>same autumn Hauskuld Dale-Kolli's son dies a littleafter the birth of Thrain's son Hauskuld, afterwardsthe Whiteness priest.*</p>
<p>In 986 Gunnar and Kolskegg and Hjort fight withthe band of foes from the Threecorner, who fell uponthem on his return from Tongue. In 987 the atonement was made at the Althing for the lives lost theyear before. In 988 Gunnar goes west to see Olaf, andhas Sam, the faithful hound, given him. In the nextyear he slays Thorgeir Otkell's son, and is banished atthe Althing shortly after 989. In 990 Gunnar's house</p>
<p>is attacked and he is slain. His two worst foes throughout his struggles were Hallgerda his wife and Mord hiscousin.*</p>
<p>With Gunnar's death the first fitte of the Saga ends. Of that portion the matchless champion Gunnar, theman whom all alike loved, whose heart was so good, and whose arm was so strong, is rather the hero than Njal. In the second, as the Seer foretold, the troubles</p>
<p>which had befallen Gunnar were turned against him andhis house. By this time Njal’s sons were all married ; but thelove of foreign travel had come over two of them, Helgiand Grim, just when Gunnar was banished. At the sametime Thrain Sigfus’ son went abroad. Njal’s sons wereaway five winters, the first three they spent in Orkney, 989-992. In the last of those years, Thrain left Norway for Orkney, soon after Helgi and Grim came thither, and the Saga can best tell what wrongs they suffered for his sake. After they left Norway, where they had met with sucha sorry welcome, they returned to their friend Earl Sigurd in the Orkneys with Kari, who had twice savedtheir lives, and who was ever after their bosom friend. Two years more, 992-994, they stayed there, returningto Iceland in the last of those years, and bringing Kari, soon to be their brother-in-law, with them. In Iceland two years, 994-996, passed before Skarphedinnslew Thrain. Now comes the Change of Faith. In 997 Thangbrand went out to convert the Icelanders by the swordrather than the word. That winter he spent with Hallof the Side at Thvattwater.* Early next spring Thang-</p>
<p>brand set out on his journey west. In the same yearhe slew Weatherlid the Skald on Fleetlithe, Thorwaldthe scurvy, and several others ; but he had bad successat the Althing, and went west to Gest's house at Hagion Bardarstrand. The next year, 999, Hjallti Skeggi'sson was outlawed for blasphemy, and meantime he and Gizur had gone abroad to Norway. There they pledgethemselves to King Olaf Tryggvason to carry out what Thangbrand, who returned in that year, having againspent a winter with Hall of the Side, had so signallyfailed to accomplish. In 1000 they set sail, and make Iceland just in time to reach the Althing. There Thorgeir of Lightwater, who had the Speakership of the Law, was won over by Hall of the Side, and perhaps by his own convictions, to bring Christianity &quot;into the Law,&quot; as it was called ; and though the heathen party murmured, the change met with no verygreat opposition. On the 24th of June 1000, for we canname the very day, Iceland passed from heathendom to Christianity, and the meekness of Hall of the Side, thesound reasoning of Snorri the priest,* and the common</p>
<p>sense and public spirit of Thorgeir the Speaker effectedwhat all the duels and bloodshedding of Thangbrand and Gudleif could never bring about. After this episode we return to our story. At thetime that his father Thrain was slain, Hauskuld waseleven years old. The winter after, he passed from Kettle of the Mark's house to that of Njal. He was now Njal's foster-child, and Njal soon loved him more thanhis own sons.* Now things are quiet, and there is alull in the story while Hauskuld grows up under thetender care of Njal. In 1004 the noble lad was nineteen, and Njal's eyes had already, two years before, searched the country far and wide for a fitting wife forhim. He found her away east at Swinefell, in Hildigunna Starkad's daughter; and here Flosi her uncle comes intothe story—Flosi, the man of noble heart and good intentions, whom fate and the duty of revenge led headlonginto crimes of the blackest dye. But Hildigunna, theproud-hearted maiden, would wed no one who had not a</p>
<p>gods are wroth at such speeches as we have heard.' Then Snorrithe priest spoke and said—' At what, then, were the gods wrothwhen this lava was molten, and ran over the spot on which we nowstand?'&quot;</p>
<p>leadership over men; she must have a priest for herhusband. Priesthoods might be bought and sold, butpriesthoods were not often in the market, and so Njal’slegal cunning, as the Saga tells us, was driven to thedevice of making new priesthoods all over the land, that his foster-child might fill one of them. We willgo into this story more at length further on, but forthe present we take the tale as we find it, and pass onto say that in 1004 the Fifth Court was established atthe Althing; that Hauskuld, now the Whiteness priest, filled one of the new priesthoods; and that Hildigunnawas married to a priest, according to the dearest wish ofher heart. Now all things looked prosperous. Njal, an oldman past seventy, might reasonably look forward to apeaceful end, leaving his sons, men of more than forty, to inherit his land and goods. He had looked forwardwith an insight which it was believed few men possessed; and what he saw, as he had told Gunnar long before, was that his end would be the last that any man couldhave guessed. Hauskuld had been settled in his own house at Ossaby, in the Landisles, close by his foster-father forabout two years, when the brutal murder of Hauskuld, Njal’s base-born son, by Lyting and his brothers took</p>
<p>place; this we put in the year 1006. The quarrel wassettled much to Lyting's loss, partly by Skarphedinn'saxe, and partly by Njal's stern award. But it wouldhave been better for Lyting if he had left that part ofthe country at Njal's solemn warning. Three yearsafter, at the Thingskala Thing, the blind son of the slainman avenged himself, not certainly in the miraculousway in which the story has come down to us, tamperedwith by monkish hands for the edification of the faithfulof that age, and for the amusement of the unbelievers ofthis. This was in the year 1009, and the same summer Valgard the guileful came back to Iceland and diedshortly after.</p>
<p>We have almost forgotten the great marplot of ourpiece. The Iago of this Icelandic tragedy, Mord Valgard's son, was now in the full venom of his nature, andhis guileful father, the stubborn heathen, too old toconform, like his crafty child, to the new faith, was stilltrue to his nature. He had handed over to his son twopriesthoods and two temples; his own at Hof, the mothertemple of the district, in the heart of old Kettlebjörn'slot, and the one at the Vale, which Fiddle Mord hadowned, and which he took in right of his wife. What wasthe meaning, then, of the ruin he saw among the boothsaround his Thing-field, and of the buildings in progress,</p>
<p>and the foundations of booths laid at Whiteness? Hemight well say “he did not know the country for thesame.” The reason given by his son was not likelyto give the old pagan peace on his deathbed. Heacted up to his principles, he thirsted for revenge, andhe took it in the way best suited to the treacherousspirit which filled the breast of both father and sonalike. With his dying breath he bequeathed an inheritance of guileful slander to his son, and the bequestwas soon put out to interest. Mord was a worthyexecutor to his father’s will. In the noble nature of Haukuld all Mord’s poisoned shafts were quenched —his mind was too pure to listen to scandal. With Njal’s sons the tempter was more successful. Skarphedinn’s jealous temper was soon on fire. He saw everbefore him the son eager to avenge his father; his impetuous spirit led on his brothers, and Kari followedthem as he was bound. But even with them thispoison took months to work, and, indeed, Valgard’scrafty counsel to Mord had been to make himself goodfriends with both sides before he began to slander eitherof them. At last, after about a year and a half, theslanderer had his way. In 1011, Mord followed Skarphedinn and his brothers and Kari one early spring morning to Ossaby. There they found Haukuld already up,</p>
<p>and busy sowing corn in his ploughed field. They all, the traitor and all, gave him wounds, Skarphedinn dealingthe deathblow, and the fate of Njal and his family wassealed. At the Althing, in the same year, 1011, theaward, which had cost so much trouble, was set atnaught by the taunts of Flosi and the bitternessof Skarphedinn. That very autumn, on a Monday nightin August, the Burners, 120 in number, worked theirwicked will at Bergthorsknoll, and not a man of thatfamous family was left alive to take revenge but thegallant Kari, who leapt unheeded from the flames. Itwas well taken. Worsted at law on the Althing in 1012, by the heedlessness of Mord, who thus spoils whatwould otherwise have been a winning case, the avengers of Njal are only too ready to seize their arms. Now it is their turn ; now they, and not the Burners, are victorious. After the fight Flosi and the Burners are banished ; Flosi for three years, some of therest for ever. But Kari and Thorgeir Craggeir Njal'sfirst cousin, mindful of Skarphedinn, will take noatonement. Both at first, and Kari alone afterwards, pursue the Burners and slay fifteen of them. Flosi goesabroad in 1013, but only to be followed by Kari, whoovertakes and slays one of his band at the very boardof Sigurd the great Earl of Orkney on Christmas-day.</p>
<p>The year after, 1014, comes Brian’s Battle, the greatfight at Clontarf, so bloody and so utterly withoutresult, that the same King Sigtrygg, who had led the hostagainst the noble “Monarch of the Tribute,” held Dublinafter the battle which he had lost, just as he held itbefore. The Northman dynasty in Dublin was destinedonly to fall before kindred blood. Here fifteen more of the Burners lose their lives; Flosi sets out on his pilgrimage, but lingers a while in Wales. As soon as Kari hearsthis he follows him up thither, slays Kol Thorstein’s son, the worst of all the band. With this deed the measureof his wrath is full. Now he too will set out for Romefor the absolution of his sins, yet he stays with Earl Malcolm in Galloway. Flosi has a year’s start of him, reaches Rome in the summer of 1014, returns to Norway the next year, 1015, stays there the winter afterwith the Earl, and returns a thoroughly reconciled manto Iceland in 1016, having fulfilled his three years ofbanishment. In that year Kari reaches Rome in timeto get back to Caithness for the winter. While hewinters there his wife dies out in Iceland. In thesummer after, 1017, he was late in getting to sea, iswrecked under Ingolf’s Head at Flosi’s door, seeks hishospitality in a storm, and is nobly welcomed. Aftera thorough atonement, Kari marries Hildigunna the</p>
<p>proud, and lives happily. In his old age Flosi is lostat sea, and thus ends the Story of Burnt Njal.</p>
<p>DAILY LIFE IN NJAL'S TIME.</p>
<p>After this outline of the story, we turn to the dailylife in Iceland at the end of the tenth century ; and first, let us look a little at the way in which these Icelanderswere housed. In the tenth century the homesteads ofthe Icelanders consisted of one main building, in whichthe family lived by day and slept at night, and of outhouses for offices and farm-buildings,* all opening on ayard. Sometimes these outbuildings touched the mainbuilding, and had doors which opened into it, but inmost cases they stood apart, and for purposes of defence, no small consideration in those days, each might belooked upon as a separate house.†</p>
<p>The main building of the house was the stofa, orsitting and sleeping room. In the abodes of chiefs andgreat men, this building had great dimensions, and wasthen called a skáli, or hall. It was also called eldhús, or eldáskáli, from the great fires which burned in it.* or touched the hall (eldhús), which is wrongly translated “kitchen” in the Saga. See also ch. 76, I. 243, where Gunnar’s foes attackhim from the outhouses. The buildings which formed the roomsof an early Icelandic house may therefore be considered as separateerections.</p>
<p>Of such a hall we have given plans, which will enablethe reader fully to understand its arrangement ; it had</p>
<p>room at Ossaby, and spurned the high seat set for him on the pallor dais. In this, and in the account that follows, when it is saidthat Hildigunna went in and out of the stofa while Flosi was at hismeal, and that she went back into the hall or skáli and unlockedher chests, and brought back the cloak into the stofa, the writer hadplainly in his eye the arrangement of the skáli usual in his time, and distinguishes between the stofa cut off from the skáli at the pallor dais, and the skáli itself; but in earlier times the terms skáli andstofa seem to have been synonymous. Again, in later times, eldhúswas used for kitchen, as in Sturlúnga, 4, 50, and this has causedthe transcriber of the Fóstbræðra Saga, Kph., 1852, pp. 96, to makea distinction between it and the stofa, when he says that Thormóð'swounds had so far healed that he was able to walk from the stofa, sitting-room, to the eldhús, kitchen. So, again, even in Egil's Saga, ch. 46, p. 92, Reykjavík, 1856, eldaskáli is clearly used for kitchen ; for at a feast it is said, &quot; When Egil came to the homestead, he sawthat the serving-men were going from the kitchen with dishes, andwere carrying them into the stofa (frá eldaskála með skutildiska okbáru inn í stufuna). There was a great fire in the kitchen, andkettles over it.&quot; Where the context shows that the two were separate buildings. In the tenth century, then, stofa, eldhús or eldaskáli, and skáli, all meant the same thing,—the main building of thehomestead, in which the whole family sat by day and slept by night. The kitchen in those days was not called eldhús, but soðhús, seething-house; the word occurs in Kormak's Saga, ch. 4. A centuryor two after, it is called eldhús, and it is still so called in Iceland atthe present day. When Grágás says, I. 459, 4to ed., &quot; Hús eruok þrjú í hvers manns híbýlum, eitt er stofa, annat eldhús, ok iiibúr.&quot; &quot; There are three houses in every man's abode, a sitting-room,</p>
<p>PLATE 1.</p>
<p>Dansk Alin or Danish Ells</p>
<p>a High Seat on the Lower Bench (Ondvegi á hinn úæðra bekk) b High Seat on the Upper Bench (Ondvegi a hinn æðra bekk) c High Seat on the Dais or Cross Bench (Ondvegi á palli) d Hearths on which the Fires were lightede Table on which the Drinking Cups stoodf Doors of the Halln Tables (Borð) o Benches</p>
<p>t E. about two English Feet</p>
<p>g Passagesh Porch or outer Hall (Andyri, Forskáli) i Store-rooms for Ale and Foodk The Pillar-door, or Man's-door. The Main Door of the House (Karldyrr or Brandadyrr) l The Lower Door for Women and Servants (Kvennadyrr) m Shut Beds (Lokrekkjur) with chairs and tables for the Heads of the Familyn Bekkr p Stools (Forsæti) o A wainscot Pannelling run all round the Hall between the pillars of the Navep Women slept in the recesses of the passage behind the Dais</p>
<p>Bartholomew, sc Edinr</p>
<p>Mac, Edinburgh</p>
<p>Bartholomew sc Edinr</p>
<p>J. G. F. del. Reykjavik</p>
<p>THE SKÁLI OR HALL. ci</p>
<p>two doors, the man’s or maindoor (karldyrr),* and thewomen’s or lesser door (kvennadyrr). Each of thesedoors opened into a porch of its own, andyri, which wasoften wide enough, in the case of that into which themen’s door opened, as we see in Thrain’s house at Gritwater, to allow many men to stand in it abreast. It wassometimes called forskáli. Internally the hall consistedof three divisions, a nave and two low side aisles. Thewalls of these aisles were of stone, and low enough toallow of their being mounted with ease, as we see happened both with Gunnar’s skáli, and with Njal’s. Thecentre division or nave on the other hand, rose high abovethe others on two rows of pillars. It was of timber, andhad an open work timber roof. The roofs of the sideaisles were supported by posts as well as by rafters andcrossbeams leaning against the pillars of the nave. Itwas on one of these cross-beams, after it had fallen downfire-house, and store-house ;” and then goes on to say that if a manhave both eldhús and skáli, he shall choose at the spring meetingwhich shall be insured in case of fire by the community, it speaksof a time when skáli and eldhús were both buildings of the samekind, while stofa was distinguished from them. The provisionclearly was meant to guard the community against the expense ofrestoring two buildings of the same kind, one of which, in the eyesof the law, was superfluous.</p>
<p>from the burning roof, that Kari got on to the side walland leapt out, while Skarphedinn, when the burnt beamsnapped asunder under his weight, was unable to followhim. There were fittings of wainscot along the wallsof the side aisles, and all round between the pillars ofthe inner row, supporting the roof of the nave, ran awainscot pannel (þili). In places the wainscot was piercedby doors opening into sleeping places shut off from therest of the hall on all sides for the heads of the family (lokrekkjur).* In other parts of the passages were sleep-</p>
<p>THE SKÁLI OR HALL. ciii</p>
<p>ing places and beds not so shut off, for the rest of thehousehold. The women servants slept in the passagebehind the dais at one end of the hall. Over some hallsthere were upper chambers or lofts, in one of which Gunnar of Lithend slept, and from which he made hisfamous defence. We have hitherto treated only of the passages andrecesses of the side aisles. The whole of the navewithin the wainscot, between the inner round pillars, was filled by the hall properly so called. It had longhearths for fires in the middle, with louvres above to letout the smoke. On either side nearest to the wainscot, and in some cases touching it, was a row of benches (bekk); in each of these was a high seat (öndvegi),*</p>
<p>throat, and wakes him. Then Gísli lifted the bedclothes off himwith one hand, but with the other hand he thrusts the spearthrough him, and pins him to the bedding. Then Thordísa callsout, ‘ Wake up, ye men in the hall, my husband Thorgrim isslain!’”</p>
<p>if the hall was that of a great man, that on the southside being the owner's seat. Before these seats weretables, boards (borð), which, however, do not seem, anymore than our early middle age tables, to have beengöfgasti maðr ok sá er gamall var ok vitr, var kallaðr konúngsráðgjafi — — en þessi maðr sat á hinn norðra pall gagnvartkonúngi, ok hét þat hit úæðra öndvegi; voru nú enn konur tilhægri handar honum, en á vinstri hönd karlar.”—“ It was thecustom of old time in Norway and in Denmark, and also in Sweden, that, where there were kings' houses and feasting-halls, therewere doors at both ends of the hall, but the king's high-seat wason the middle of that long-bench which was on the side of thesun (i. e., on the south side). There the queen sat on the king'sleft hand, and that was then called ‘ öndvegi,’ and on eitherhand, he or she of men or women who sat nearest to the ‘ öndvegi’ had the most honourable seat, but he or she the leasthonourable that sat nearest to the doors. The noblest man, andhe who was both old and wise, was called the king's councillor (ráðgjafi), but that man sat on the north bench over againstthe king, and that was called the lower ‘ öndvegi.’ And nowagain the women were on his (the councillor's) right hand, andthe men on his left.” It appears from this description that the men and women oneach side of the hall sat opposite to one another. This, thoughtrue of great ladies in kings' halls in the days of Magnus thequiet, at the end of the eleventh century, was not true of the Icelandic housewives in Njal's time, who always sat, if they satat all, on the dais at the east end of the hall. Sometimes, insteadof using the term “ öndvegi” at all, it is simply said that the chiefsat “ on mid bench,” “ á miðjum bekk,” and the men on eitherside of him “ outwards,” towards the west end, or “ inwards” towards the dais, at the east end of the hall.</p>
<p>THE SKÁLI OR HALL. cv</p>
<p>always kept standing, but were brought in with, andcleared away after each meal. On ordinary occasions, one row of benches on each side sufficed; but when therewas a great feast, or a sudden rush of unbidden guests, as when Flosi paid his visit to Tongue to take down Asgrim’s pride, a lower kind of seats, or stools (forsæti) were brought in, on which the men of lowest rank sat, and which were on the outside of the tables, nearest tothe fire. At the end of the hall, over against the door, was a raised platform or dais (pall), on which also wassometimes a high seat and benches. It was where thewomen sat at weddings, as we see from the account of Hallgerda’s wedding, in our Saga, and from many otherpassages. In later times the seat of honour was shifted fromthe upper bench to the dais; and this seems to havebeen the case occasionally with kings and earls in Njal’stime, if we may judge from the passage in the Saga, where Hildigunna fits up a high seat on the dais for Flosi, which he spurns from under him with the words, thathe was “neither king nor earl,” meaning that he was asimple man, and would have nothing to do with any ofthose new fashions.* It was to the dais that Asgrim</p>
<p>betook himself when Flosi paid him his visit, and unless Asgrim’s hall was much smaller than we have anyreason to suppose would be the case in the dwelling ofso great a chief, Flosi must have eaten his meal not farfrom the dais, in order to allow of Asgrim’s getting nearenough to aim a blow at him with a poleaxe from therail at the edge of the platform. On high days and feastdays, part of the hall was hung with tapestry (tjöldir, refill), often of great worth and beauty, and over thehangings all along the wainscot, were carvings such asthose which Laxdæla* tells us Olaf the peacock had cutfor his great hall at Hjarðarholt, and those which our Saga tells us Thorkel Foulmouth had carved on the stoolthe king in his high seat on the upper bench, and has two others, one on each side, for Earl Gilli and himself. In much later timesthis fashion seems to have been kept up in Orkney. See the accountof Earl Paul’s hall at Orfir. Orkn. Saga. New edition, ch. 70, vol.</p>
<p>THE DYNGJA OR LADIES’ BOWER. cvii</p>
<p>before his high seat and over his shut bed, in memoryof those deeds of “ derring do” which he had performedin foreign lands. Against the wainscot in various parts of the hall, shields and weapons were hung up. It was the sound of Skarphedinn’s axe against the wainscot that woke up Njal and brought him out of his shut bed, when hissons set out on their hunt after Sigmund the white and Skiolld. Now let us pass out of the Skáli by either door, andcast our eyes at the high gables with their carved projections, and we shall understand at a glance how it wasthat Mord’s counsel to throw ropes round the ends ofthe timbers, and then to twist them tight with levers androllers, could only end, if carried out, in tearing thewhole roof off the house. It was then much easierwork for Gunnar’s foes to mount up on the side-roofsas the Easterling, who brought word that his bill wasat home, had already done, and thence to attack himin his sleeping loft with safety to themselves, after hisbow-string had been cut. Some homesteads, like those of Gunnar at Lithend, and Gisli and his brother at Hol in Hawkdale, in the West Firths, had bowers (dyngja pl. dyngjur), ladies’ chambers, where the women sat and span, and where,</p>
<p>in both the houses that we have named, gossip andscandal was talked with the worst results.* These</p>
<p>THE DYNGJA OR LADIES’ BOWER. cix</p>
<p>bowers stood away from the other buildings. It was inone of them, unless the word there means “cairn,” that Daurud saw the Valkyries at work on the Woof of War. In very early times this dyngia was called búr, the original of our “bower.” So, for instance, in Sæ- mund’s Edda, it is said of Brynhilda, that she í búriborða vakti; and Gudruna says, “I was a maid of maids, my mother reared me bright in bower” (björt í búri); In the Danish Kæmpeviser, or heroic ballads too, aswell as in our own minstrelsy, the distinction betweenbower and hall; the one as the men’s, the other as thewomen’s abode, was long kept up. But in Iceland the</p>
<p>to speak again—‘Ill often comes of women’s gossip,’ said she, ‘andso it may be that very great harm may come of this, and now let ustake counsel about it.’ ‘Oh!’ said Asgerda, ‘I have thought ofa plan which will be sure to answer.’ ‘What is that?’ asks Auð. ‘I will throw my arms round my husband’s, Thorkell’s neck, whenwe go to bed this night, and be as bonny and buxom as ever I canto him, and then his heart will change, and so he will forgive me. And I will tell him that this was all a lie that we have been chattering about, and that there is no truth in it. But if thou thinkestthat he will not listen to me, pray tell me what to do, and what wiltthou do thyself?’ ‘I will soon tell thee,’ said Auð; ‘I will tellmy husband Gísli the whole truth as to what I need to have counselabout, whether it be good or ill, and then he will be sure to give megood advice, for I am sure it will be best for me.’” We need not saythat Asgerda does not persuade her lazy husband that there is notruth in women’s gossip. Vestein is slain, and a bloody feud follows.</p>
<p>word seems to have lost this meaning quite as early asthe settlement. In all the Sagas relating to Icelanddyngja is used for the woman's bower, while búr or útibúr means the safe or storehouses in which provisionsand sometimes things of more value were kept. Bothdyngja and búr, at the time of which we write, were outlying buildings away from the skáli.</p>
<p>Every Icelandic homestead was approached by astraight road (geil, geilar) which led up to the yardround which the main building and its outhouses andfarm buildings stood. This was fenced in on each sideby a wall of stones or turf. Near the house stood the &quot;town&quot; or home fields where meadow hay was grown, andin favoured positions where corn would grow, there werealso enclosures of arable land near the house.* On the</p>
<p>uplands and marshes more hay was grown. Hay wasthe great crop in Iceland ; for the large studs of horsesand great herds of cattle that roamed upon the hillsand fells in summer needed fodder in the stable andbyre in winter, when they were brought home. As forthe flocks of sheep, they seem to have been reckonedand marked every autumn, and milked and shorn insummer ; but to have fought it out with nature onthe hillside all the year round as they best could. Hay, therefore, was the main staple, and hay-makingthe great end and aim of an Icelandic farmer. Wehave seen already how Gísli set every one to work ona good drying day, and Gunnar's death in our Saga may</p>
<p>Corn grew in Iceland in old times just as wood grew there, and woodbig enough to build a few ships, and abundantly enough to be usedin charcoal burning. It was not so long ago that land in the Orkneyswas thought unfit to grow grain, but this delusion has disappearedbefore a better system of cultivation, brought in by Mr. Balfour of Balfour and Trenaby, who is as great in his way as Earl Sigurd; and the same thing would, in all probability, happen in Iceland. Atpresent the only grain grown in Iceland seems to be the wild oat (mel), Elymus avenarius, which flourishes abundantly on the sandson the south-east of the island, on the very same spot, in fact, whereour Saga tells us Kari and Bjorn, after taking vengeance on the sonsof Sigfus, cut the wild oats for their horses, lest they should starveon those sands barren of all else. Olafsen and Povelsen, in their &quot; Journey through Iceland,&quot; mention that wheat would grow intheir time, nearly one hundred years ago, at Lithend.</p>
<p>be set down to the fact that all his men were away inthe Landisles finishing their haymaking. Again, Flosi, before the Burning, bids all his men go home and makean end of their haymaking, and when that is over, tomeet and fall on Njal and his sons. Even the great dutyof revenge gives way to the still more urgent duty ofproviding fodder for the winter store. Hayneed, to runshort of hay (at vera í heyþroti), was the greatest misfortune that could befall a man, who with a fine herd andstud, might see both perish before his eyes in winter. Then it was that men of open heart and hand, like Gunnar, helped their tenants and neighbours, often, aswe see in Gunnar's case, till they had neither hay norfood enough left for their own household, and had tobuy or borrow from those that had. Then, too, it wasthat the churl's nature came out in Otkell and others, who having enough and to spare, would not part withtheir abundance for love or money.*</p>
<p>These men were no idlers. They worked hard, andall, high and low, worked. In no land does the dignityof labour stand out so boldly. The greatest chiefs sowand reap, and drive their sheep, like Glum, the Speaker’sbrother, from the fells. The mightiest warriors werethe handiest carpenters and smiths. Gísli Súr’s sonknew every corner of his foeman’s house, because hehad built it with his own hands while they were goodfriends. Njal’s sons are busy at armourer’s work, likethe sons of the mythical Ragnar before them, when thenews comes to them that Sigmund has made a mock ofthem in his songs. Gunnar sows his corn with hisarms by his side, when Otkell rides over him; and Hauskuld the Whiteness priest is doing the same workwhen he is slain. To do something, and to do it well, was the Icelander’s aim in life, and in no land does laziness like that of Thorkell meet with such well deservedreproach. They were early risers and went early tobed, though they could sit up late if need were. Theythought nothing of long rides before they broke their fast.</p>
<p>burnt, house and all. That was the great case of fire-raising before Njal’s time, and the feud which followed it, gave rise, as we havealready seen, to the establishment of new arrangements as to thetrial of suits in local courts, as well as to the establishment of the Quarter Thiugs.</p>
<p>Their first meal was at about seven o'clock (dagverðr) and though they may have taken a morsel of food duringthe day, we hear of no other regular daily meal tillevening, when between seven and eight again they hadsupper (máttmál, night-meal).* While the men labouredon the farm or in the smithy, threw nets for fish in theteeming lakes and rivers, or were otherwise at workduring the day, the women, and the housewife, or mistress of the house, at their head, made ready the food forthe meals, carded wool, and sewed or wove or span.† Atmeal-time the food seems to have been set on the board</p>
<p>by the women, who waited on the men, and at greatfeasts, such as Gunnar’s wedding, the wives of his nearestkinsman, and of his dearest friend. Thorhillda Skaldtongue, Thrain’s wife, and Bergthora Njal’s wife, wentabout from board to board waiting on the guests.*</p>
<p>In everyday life they were a simple sober people, early to bed and early to rise—ever struggling with therigour of the climate. On great occasions, as at the Yule feasts in honour of the gods, held at the temples, or at “ arvel ” “ heir-ale,” feasts, when heirs drank themselves into their father’s land and goods, or at theautumn feasts, which friends and kinsmen gave to oneanother, there was no doubt great mirth and jollity, much eating and hard drinking of mead and freshbrewed ale;† but these drinks are not of a very headykind, and one glass of spirits in our days would send aman farther on the road to drunkenness than many ahorn of foaming mead. They were by no means that</p>
<p>race of drunkards and hard livers which some have seenfit to call them. Nor were these people such barbarians as some havefancied, to whom it is easier to rob a whole people ofits character by a single word than to take the pains toinquire into its history. They were bold warriors andbolder sailors. The voyage between Iceland and Norway, or Iceland and Orkney, was reckoned as nothing ; butfrom the west firths of Iceland, Eric the Red—no ruffianas he has been styled, though he had committed an act ofmanslaughter—discovered Greenland ; and from Greenland the hardy seafarers pushed on across the main, tillthey made the dreary coast of Labrador. Down thatthey ran until they came at last to Vínland hit góði, Vineland the good, which took its name from thegrapes that grew there. From the accounts givenof the length of the days in that land, it is now theopinion of those best fitted to judge on such matters,* that this Vineland was no other than some part of the North American continent near Rhode Island or Massachussets, in the United States. Their ships werehalf-decked, high out of the water at stem and stern, low in the waist, that the oars might reach the water, for they were made for rowing as well as for sailing. The</p>
<p>after-part had a poop (lypting). The fore-part seems tohave been without deck, but loose planks were laidthere for men to stand on. A distinction was madebetween long-ships or ships of war, made long for speed, and merchant ships or byrðings, ships of burden, whichwere built to carry cargo. The common complementwas thirty rowers, which in war-ships made sometimes a third and sometimes a sixth of the crew. All round the warships, before the fight began, shieldwas laid on shield, on a rim or rail, which ran allround the bulwarks, presenting a mark like the hammocks of our navy, by which a long-ship could be atonce detected.* The bulwarks in warships could beheightened at pleasure, and this was called “to girdlethe ship for war.” The merchant ships often carriedheavy loads of meal and timber from Norway, andmany a one of these half-decked yawls no doubtfoundered, like Flosi’s unseaworthy ship, under theweight of her heavy burden of beams and planks, when overtaken by the autumnal gales on that wild sea. The passages were often very long, more than one hundreddays is sometimes mentioned as the time spent on avoyage between Norway and Iceland.</p>
<p>As soon as the ship reached the land, she ran intosome safe bay or creek, the great landing places on thesouth and south-east coasts being Eyrar, “The Eres,” assuch spots are still called in some parts of the British Isles, that is, the sandy beaches opening into laguneswhich line the shore of the marsh district called Flói ; and Hornfirth, whence Flosi and the Burners put tosea after their banishment. There the ship was laidup in a slip (naust), made for her, she was stripped andmade snug for the winter, a roof of planks being probably thrown over her, while the lighter portions of hercargo were carried on pack-saddles up the country. Thetimber seems to have been floated up the firths andrivers as near as it could be got to its destination, andthen dragged by trains of horses to the spot where itwas to be used.</p>
<p>Some of the cargo, the meal, and cloth, and arms, was wanted at home; some of it was sold to neighbourseither for ready money or on trust, it being usual to askfor the debt either in coin or in kind, the spring after.* Sometimes the account remained outstanding for a much</p>
<p>longer time. Among these men whose hands were soswift to shed blood, and in that state of things whichlooks so lawless, but which in truth was based uponfixed principles of justice and law, the rights of property were so safe, that men like Njal went lendingtheir money to overbearing fellows like Starkad under Threecorner for years, on condition that he should paya certain rate of interest. So also Gunnar had goodsand money out at interest, out of which he wished tosupply Unna’s wants. In fact the law of debtor andcreditor, and of borrowing money at usance, was wellunderstood in Iceland, from the very first day that the Northmen set foot on its shores.</p>
<p>If we examine the condition of the sexes in thisstate of society, we shall find that men and women metvery nearly on equal terms. If any woman is shockedto read how Thrain Sigfus’ son treated his wife, in parting from her, and marrying a new one, at a moment’swarning, she must be told that Gudruna, in Laxdæla, threatened one of her three husbands with much thesame treatment, and would have put her threat intoexecution if he had not behaved as she commanded him. In our Saga, too, the gudewife of Bjorn the boasterthreatens him with a separation if he does not standfaithfully by Kari; and in another Saga of equal age</p>
<p>and truthfulness, we hear of one great lady who partedfrom her husband, because, in playfully throwing apillow of down at her, he unwittingly struck herwith his finger. In point of fact, the customary lawallowed great latitude to separations, at the will ofeither party, if good reason could be shown for thedesired change. It thought that the worst serviceit could render to those whom it was intended toprotect would be to force two people to live togetheragainst their will, or even against the will of onlyone of them, if that person considered him or herself, as the case might be, ill-treated or neglected. Gunnarno doubt could have separated himself from Hallgerdafor her thieving, just as Hallgerda could have partedfrom Gunnar for giving her that slap in the face ; butthey lived on, to Gunnar’s cost and Hallgerda’s infamy. In marriage contracts the rights of brides, like Unna thegreat heiress of the south-west, or Hallgerda the flower ofthe western dales, were amply provided for. In thelatter case it was a curious fact that this wicked womanretained possession of Laugarness, near Reykjavik, whichwas part of her second husband Glum’s property, to herdying day, and there, according to constant tradition, shewas buried in a cairn which is still shown at the presenttime, and which is said to be always green, summer and</p>
<p>winter alike.* Where marriages were so much matter ofbarter and bargain, the father’s will went for so much andthat of the children for so little, love matches werecomparatively rare ; and if the songs of Gunnlaugrsnaketongue and Kormak have described the charmsof their fair ones, and the warmth of their passion inglowing terms, the ordinary Icelandic marriage of thetenth century was much more a matter of business, in the first place, than of love. Though strong affection may have sprung up afterwards between husbandand wife, the love was rather a consequence of the marriage than the marriage a result of the love. When death came it was the duty of the next of kinto close the eyes and nostrils† of the departed, and our Saga, in that most touching story of Rodny’s behaviourafter the death of her son Hauskuld, affords an instanceof the custom. When Njal asks why she, the mother, as next of kin, had not closed the eyes and nostrils ofthe corpse, the mother answers, “ That duty I meant for Skarphedinn.” Skarphedinn then performs the duty,</p>
<p>and, at the same time, undertakes the duty of revenge. In heathen times the burial took place on a “how” orcairn, in some commanding position near the abode ofthe dead, and now came another duty. This was thebinding on of the “ hellshoes,” which the deceased wasbelieved to need in heathen times on his way either to Valhalla’s bright hall of warmth and mirth, or to Hell’sdark realm of cold and sorrow. That duty over, thebody was laid in the cairn with goods and arms, sometimes as we see was the case with Gunnar in a sittingposture ; sometimes even in a ship, but always in achamber formed of baulks of timber or blocks of stone, over which earth and gravel were piled.*</p>
<h3>PUBLIC LIFE AND THE ALTHING.</h3>
<p>With regard to what may be called their public life, the commonwealth had many claims on the freeman’stime. Every freeman was naturally bound to be presentat the local things, and even at the Althing. In asystem of jurisprudence where so much was thrownupon the community, and the State as a body took solittle on itself; where there were comparatively so fewfreemen, and where the system required so much evidence on oath, it would have been no easy matter forthe priests to name men to serve as judges, or forplaintiffs and defendants to find neighbours to bear witness or to sit on the inquests in the Quarter Courts atthe Althing, unless a great body of those fit to fulfil</p>
<p>brother-in-law,’ says he, ‘to bind hellshoon on the feet of menere they are laid in the cairn’—for it was then said that theyshould fare to Hell when they were dead; and that is why wehave a saying that that man is thought to be busking himselffor Hell who clothes himself much, or is long in clothing himself when he goes out—‘and now I will do this for Vestein,’ says Thorgrim, ‘and bind the hellshoon on his feet.’ But whenhe had made an end of that work then Thorgrim spoke andsaid, ‘I cannot bind on hellshoon at all if these loosen.’” Herethe duty seems not to have been that of the next of kin, butof the priest, one of whom Thorgrim was.</p>
<p>such functions had attended it.* It was therefore considered a right and proper thing to ride to the Althing ; if for no other reason than that of seeing the world. Besides law matters, much else was done there in theway of business between man and man. Pleasure wasnot excluded. There were feasts and biddings to feasts, and, as we know in Hrut's and Gunnar's cases, marriagesmight be made there, for a man went thither often withhis wife and daughters. If we may judge from severalpassages in our Saga, it was usual with the great chiefs</p>
<p>Scale of English Miles</p>
<p>B l á s k ö g (Blue Wood)</p>
<p>Road from Reykjavik Almannagia (The Great Rift) Booth Mouth of Oxara Thingvalla Church Inundated Grass Valley Where the Horse Pasture Covered with stunted birch-bushes and gradually ascending towards Skialldbreid Jokull U p p e r P l a i n Hrafnagia (The Ravens Rift) Hrafnagia (Ravine) Thingvalla Almannagia Hrafnagia Bartholomew sc. Edin EDMONSTON &amp; DOUGLAS, EDINBURGH.</p>
<p>which stood all along Axewater,* from the waterfall tothe lake. The Thingvalla or Thingfield itself, was a vast sheetof lava which at some unknown, but very early period, burst forth from the fells in the direction of Armann’sfell, and taking a south-easterly direction flowed on till itmet the Thingvalla Lake. When first formed it lay witha dip from north-east to south-west, that being the naturalinclination of the soil which it covered. It must havebeen a mighty stream, for an arm, or rather the body ofit, poured down the country on the western shore of the Thingvalla Lake for many miles. At some later period, all that portion of this stream with which we have moreparticularly to do, and which lay at the north end of</p>
<p>the lake, dropped at once and subsided. The lava outof which it was formed was cavernous, an immensebubble inflated by gaseous vapours at the time of theeruption, which subsequently sank and collapsed eitherfrom its own weight or by the force of subterraneanfire. When it subsided it still kept its old dip fromnorth-east to south-west, so that the eastern side of the Thingvalla, “the upper plain,” as it is called in our Saga, remained considerably higher than that on thewest. The line of subsidence on either side was markedby two long chasms, or rifts, or furrows in the lava, theouter and higher edge or brink of each being at theoriginal level of the whole stream as it first poured fromthe fell, while the inner and lower edge was formed asthe lava bent and curled up, as it were, when it dropped. At the same time the whole surface of the brittlesunken field was split and cracked with countless lesserrifts, which were most numerous and most marked on itssouth-western slope. The rift or furrow on the easternside was called the Raven’s Rift or Geo (Hrafnagjá), thaton the west, which was much more deeply furrowed andindented than the other, was called the Great Rift or Geo (Almannagjá). Of this last rift, both the lips or edges increase in height as they near the lake. The dip and subsidence having been evidently greatest at the south-western</p>
<p>angle of the field. About a mile and a half from wherethe Great Rift touches the Lake, its inner lip ceases, andjust above this point a stream, Öxará (Axewater), leapsin a waterfall down from the outer lip of the Rift whichstill continues, runs for a short space parallel to it, thenflows out into the Thingfield, and finds its way southto the Lake, cutting off a strip of the field between itselfand the inner lip of the Rift. If it be asked why thestream does not follow the furrow of the Rift to the Lake, the answer is that as the bed of the furrow risesfrom the Lake, and as the lips lessen in height as theyrecede from it, the furrow, just south of the point atwhich the river falls down from its outer lip, is at a higherlevel than the bed of the stream, and much higher thanthat of the general level of the Thingfield, which isreached from the Rift by a sharp descent. The river therefore flows down towards the field in a rapid. Just wherethe stream turns into the plain below the point wherethe inner lip of the Rift ceases, it forms an island, ortwo or three islands, as the water happens to be high orlow, mere shoals of lava sand which rise out of itsshallow bed. A short quarter of a mile from the bed of Axewater, and to the south-east of the island at theturn, a rocky portion of the plain has been cut off bythe junction of two of the lesser rifts or fissures which</p>
<p>have been mentioned, so as almost to form an island. This is the famous Hill of Laws, or Lögberg, of whichwe hear so much in our Story, and which was the heartof the Icelandic body politic. Here, on the highestpeak of the rock, on the Lögberg properly so called, formal notices of trials, and proclamations on matters ofpublic interest, were uttered by word of mouth, andhere too, on the more level portion of it was the Courtof Laws (Lögretta), the Supreme Court, and Deliberative Assembly or Parliament of the Commonwealth. Theentrance to it was by a neck of land so narrow thatthree bold men might hold it against a host. Therifts that encircle it as with a moat are broad and deep. They are about sixteen feet wide in their narrowestpoint, across which Flosi, the leader of the Burners, is said by a tradition, which, though unconfirmed byour Saga, seems sufficiently trustworthy to mention, to have made a wild leap when the great battle aroseat the Althing, after the suit for the Burning had beenheard. The depth of the rifts all round are about nineteen fathoms, fifteen of which are filled with water, andthe other four are sheer and ragged rock. Such were, and such are, the features of the Thingfield, a vastsunken plain of lava, about four miles broad, and rathermore than four miles deep, lying with a dip or slope from</p>
<p>north-east to south-west, between two great rifts, or furrows, to the inner lips of which, east and west, theground rises with a steep ascent. The Great Rift, on thewest, is only accessible from the Thingfield by one steeppath, leading to a single point just south of and abovethe bed of the river. On this western side, Axewater (Öxará), a stream of no great breadth or depth cuts offa narrow strip of the Thingfield, beyond which the innerlip of the Great Rift abruptly rises, increasing rapidlyin height and steepness as it nears the lake. It wasalong the banks of this stream that the booths of thefreemen and others who flocked to the Althing from thefour Quarters of the land chiefly lay. Some way downthe stream there was a bridge, in all likelihood not ofstone, but such as that which still spans Brúará, Bridgewater, made of planks and baulks of timber, of whichmaterial, indeed, we know from Grágás,* that the bridgesin Iceland were commonly made.†</p>
<p>With regard to the position of the various booths, itseems certain that the chiefs and Thingmen from thesame Quarter all established themselves on the samepart of the Thingfield. So far as we can learn, the Eastfirthers, and the dwellers in the district more immediately round the Althing itself, were almost the onlychiefs that had their booths east of Axewater. Thus Njal, and the men of Rangriver, are said to have pitchedtheir booths on the west bank, close to the lake. Nextto them were the Daledwellers (Dalverjar), that is, themen of the Dale priesthood, east of Markfleet ; then</p>
<p>of the bridge while his father gathers force to part the two bands. When he comes back they cross the bridge, but by this time Flosiand his band had been driven down the west bank of the streamsome way, and Ljot is slain as soon as ever he reaches the lava ; that is, as soon as ever he crossed the turf that borders the bed of thestream and began to ascend the slope to the inner lip of the Great Rift. This is also shown from Hrafnkell Freysgoða Saga, p. 12, where Samand old Thorbjorn, who, though Eastfirthers, had not pitched theirbooth together with those of the other Eastfirthers high up thestream near the waterfall, get up early one morning and go down to Axewater to wash themselves below the bridge (fyrir neðan brúna). Opposite to them, on the west of the stream, were the booths of themen from Thorskafirth, in the north-west. As it is expressly said thatboth Sam and Thorbjorn wished to pitch their booths &quot;nowherenear those of the Eastfirthers,&quot; and as we know that the Eastfirtherswere high up the stream, and that Sam to avoid them went to thebridge, we may infer that the bridge was well down the stream, evenwithout the confirmation of this view afforded by our Saga.</p>
<p>Öxará (River)</p>
<p>Waterfall Byrgire Booth Lögberg (Law Rock) Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth</p>
<p>came the men of Mossfell and the Lithe ; next the menfrom Borgarfirth ; then the men from the West Firths— from Thorskafirth, opposite to the bridge, and Waterfirth. Then came the chiefs from the north, from Skagafirthand Eyjafirth ; and then above them the chiefs from Hvammsfirth and the eastern shore of Broadfirth. Inthe Hladbooth, which seems to have stood close to theriver bank, nearest to the turn at the island, Eyjolf Bolverk’s son, Snorri’s kinsman, had his booth ; and abovehim, on the top of the steep rise leading to the Rift, justwhere the inner lip dies away, and so makes it possibleto get into the furrow, was the Outwork-booth, Virkisbooth, in which Snorri the priest had established himself at the Althing held after Njal’s burning ; here it was, on the rise, that he drew up his men, and hindered Flosiand the Burners from making their way into the Rift.</p>
<p>By this booth, which, no doubt, took its name fromthe strength of the position,* led the only path up to the Great Rift from the Thingfield ; the ascent, as we havesaid, and as may be seen still better from our plans, issteep and rugged, rising sharply from the river. It wasthis path that Flosi, Bjarni, and Hallbjorn took with Eyjolf, whom they had just met at the Hladbooth down</p>
<p>below, when they led him up into the Great Rift beforegiving him the ring as a bribe to undertake their defence. When they came to the point at the top of therise where the inner and lower lip of the Rift ends, theyordered their men to sit down there and keep watch, while they went on into the Rift till they reached thespot where the road then turned, as it still turns, up theside of the outer and upper lip of the Rift, and there itwas, after they had scaled a portion of its height, that theymade Eyjolf sit down between them, and first flattered, and then fairly bribed him with a massive gold ring, totake upon him the conduct of the cause which Bjarnihad foreseen would end in the death of the man whopleaded it.</p>
<p>Returning to the Thingfield, and descending the steeppath which leads to the Thingfield, the way leads acrossthe island, called in later times Execution Island, butwhich, in the days of which we write, was better knownas the holm on which duels* were fought. It was to</p>
<p>this island that Hrut challenged Mord, when the goodlawyer, at the advice of his old friend Jorund the priest, refused to go. The scoffing which followed that refusalshows that public opinion had expected him to fallback on the customs of his forefathers, and put histrust in the God of Battles. It was to the same islandthat Hrut, in his turn, was challenged by Gunnar, andwas told by his friends to follow Mord’s example, and torefuse, because he was no more a match for Gunnar than Mord had been for him. Crossing the river and standing on its eastern bank, we are about on the spot where the old Quarter Courts sat. It is plain, even from the term “going out” used of the judges, that those Courts did not sit on the Lögberg, but our Saga gives us a better proof of the fact, in the account of the suit after the Burning, when itsays that Mord called upon his inquest to take theirseats “west on the river bank,” and when it tells us, shortly afterwards, that while Mord and Asgrim weresummoning Flosi and Eyjolf to the Fifth Court, whichwe know sat on the Lögberg, on the site of the Court of Laws, Flosi and Eyjolf were losing their time at the Eastfirthers’ Quarter Court, in trying to divide (vèfengja) the judges, and thus nonsuit the plaintiff. On the western bank of the stream, in a line with</p>
<p>the waterfall, was Byrgir’s booth, the farthest north, as Njal’s is said to have been the farthest south, of all thebooths. South of this booth, but on the eastern side ofthe water, were the booths of the men from Axefirthand Weaponfirth, and from all the Eastfirths in succession. As far as we can judge from the imperfect accounts which have come down to us, a portion of the Northlanders, such as the men from Lightwater, seem tohave had their booths on this side the stream, alongwith the Eastfirthers, whom they backed in theirquarrel, while another portion of them, headed by Gudmund the powerful, had their booths on the westof the stream, close to Snorri and the Westfirthers. It is possible that we may see in this split among themen of the north the results of that great feud between Gudmund and the men of Lightwater, in which thatmighty chief for once was worsted, and had to bear theill words spread abroad about him, to which Skarphedinn referred in his sharp reproof to Gudmund. Somewhere west of the river, and according to some, but verylate accounts, in the midst of the Thingfield, betweenthe two rifts, Skapti Thorod’s sons’ booth stood withone or two others ; and in later times, when there werebishops in Iceland, the bishop’s booth, the site of whichis still pointed out, stood below the bridge, just above</p>
<p>the freeman’s churchyard. This burial-place, which wouldnot have been used for such a purpose in heathen times, when the custom seems to have been to bury a manclose to where he died or fell, and throw a heap of stonesor cairn over him of greater or less size, was probably, until the Change of Faith, a portion of the site, if notthe site itself, of the local Thing, over which the Priestof the whole Host (Allsherjargoði) presided. The position of the Christian church close by, and the fact thatit was the place where the fines awarded at the Althingseem to have been collected, would speak for this, evenif we did not know that it was usual with the Christiansto seize the sacred places and sanctuaries which theheathen used to frequent, and to baptise and hallowthem to Christian purposes. However this may be, thesite of the churchyard is well known, and, as such, wehave marked it on our plan running down quite to theriver bank.*</p>
<p>In modern times almost every traveller who visitsthe Thingfield approaches it from Reykjavik, and after Snorri's booth, but the level space (hleðsla) which is there betweenthem on the brink of the Rift, was in old time (áðr) the place of meeting for the Quarter Courts (fjórðungsdóma) ; but on the rise on thesouth of Snorri's booth, as one makes for the Thingfield, wasthe booth of Eyjolf Bolverk's son ; but where the Governor's boothnow is, was in old time Gizur the white's booth, but that next onthe north of it, now called Hedemann's booth, was of old Geirthe priest's booth. Asgrim Ellidagrim's son's booth was up towardsthe rift, opposite to (mots við) the governor's booth. Egil Skallagrim's son's booth was between the booth of Geir the priest and the Rift, straight up. Hauskuld Dale-Kolli's son's booth was betweenthe river and Geir the priest's booth. The booth of Hjallti Skeggi'sson was north of the Court of Laws. Flosi had at first his bootheast of the river, and a short way from Hall of the Side's booth, whichwas afterwards Ögmund's booth, west of the fences of the Thingvalla ' town.' The booth of Gudmund the powerful was near the riveron the west side, by the way which comes down from Snorri's boothto the Court of Laws ; his booth before was to the north? of theriver, near to the old Hill of Laws, which was east of the river. Between the Rifts was also a bye-path, which led to the booth of Skapti the Lawman (Speaker of the Law), the son of Thorod, andalso to the booths of Marcus Skeggi's son and Grim Sverting's son. Farthest of all south, along the river, opposite to Thingvallastede, was Njal's booth, near the river, to the south of Gizur the white'sbooth, and the booths of the men of Rangrivervale. Fiddle Mord'sbooth was out towards the hill above, and west of Gizur the white'sbooth. In the time of Thord and John the lawmen, the Court of Laws was brought from the south off the holm, and east of the oldgovernor's booth, to the Court of Laws which now is (1700), andwhich was built of timber.&quot; Thord Gudmund's son, and John John's</p>
<p>THE THINGFIELD IN 1000 AND 1700. cxxxvii</p>
<p>riding for hours over barren and rugged tracts of mossgrown lava, suddenly reins up his galloway on theson, were, the one lawman for the south and east Quarters, the otherlawman for the north and west, between the years 1570-1605. Seethe list of Speakers of the Law, Safn til Sögu Ísl., II. 10. Withregard to this description of the arrangement of the booths, it must besaid that it rests entirely on late tradition, and is generally perplexingby comparing things of which we do know something with thingsof which we know nothing—things like Snorri's booth in 1000 withthe Governor's booth in 1700. In some points the tradition of 1700 is directly at variance with our Saga. It is perhaps possible, thoughit is not very likely, that Byrgir's booth, where Flosi established himself, might have been west of the river under the waterfall, but wecannot see why at such a time he should have left the booths of hismen from the east and his friends from the north and gone nearerto his foes. In this point, therefore, we think that if the traditionof 1700 refers to Byrgir's booth as west of the river, it is wrong. Whether Flosi, who lived many years after the Burning, went awaywith his booth west at some later period of his life, is anotherquestion. But most plainly wrong is the tradition of 1700 when itsays that Thorgeir of Lightwater's booth was where the Court of Laws stood in 1700, that is, as it says farther on, west of the river, for our Saga most positively says that the booths of the men of Lightwater were east of the river. Again, when it says that Skapti Thorod's son's booth was east of the river, between the Rifts, this is also contradicted by our Saga, for it is plain in all theaccounts of begging for help at the Althing that Skapti's booth wason the west side of the river, not far from the booths of the menfrom Mossfell, and from those of Möðruvale. In the battle at the Althing he probably left his booth and came up the west bank of theriver, and so met the battle coming down as he was making for Snorri's booth. The tradition of 1700 may perhaps be right when</p>
<p>very brink of the upper lip of the Great Rift, and gazesupon the sunk field, stretching miles before him. By</p>
<p>it says that Gudmund the powerful changed his booth from east towest, for, as we have seen in the text, he might have been led to doso after being worsted by the men of Lightwater. In this our Saga agrees with the tradition of 1700, for on several occasions, in the beggings for help, it implies that Gudmund’s booth was on thewest bank; and in the account of the battle at the Althing, it says, in as many words, that the men of Möðruvale, of whom Gudmundwas the mighty chief, were on that side of the stream. Whetherthe tradition is right in putting the Quarter Courts on the west sideof the stream is great matter of doubt. It is true that, in the suitfor the Burning, Mord calls on his inquest to take their seats “weston the river bank;” but the “west” seems here to mean west ofthe Court, which we believe sate on the east side of the stream. Had the Court sat west of the river, Mord would have used thewords “east on the river bank,” to imply that the inquest sat eastof the Court. The tradition is probably right when it places Njal’sbooth furthest south of all; and when it places the men of Rangriver, Mossfell, and the Lithe on that side. We know from othersources, besides the tradition, that the men of the West Firths hadtheir booths on the west bank; and our Saga agrees with the tradition, when it places Eyjolf Bolverk’s son’s booth, which it calls the Hladbooth, a name which perhaps means “Brinkbooth,” below thatof Snorri, on the river’s brink. We know from Sturlúnga, II., p. 82, that this Hladbooth, whatever the name may mean, belonged to Snorri’s family, of whom Eyjolf was one, for he was Snorri’s cousin. The words of Sturlúnga are—“That summer Thord came early tothe Thing and fitted up the Hladbooth, which went with, or belongedto, the priesthood or family of Snorri (Hlaðbúð er fylgði Snorrúngagoðorði). It seems to have come to the Sturlúngs by the marriage</p>
<p>that route the Westfirthers and Borgarfirthers, and someof the Northlanders from Skagafirth and Húnafirthsought the Althing in ancient times ; but so far as our Saga is concerned, that route is only once or twice particularly mentioned; while on the other hand, as thechief actors in the Saga came from a district lying southeast of the Thingfield, almost all the wayfarers thitherare described as reaching it by the eastern, or Raven’s Rift lying opposite to the Great or Western Rift. Mostof the Northlanders, all the Eastfirthers, as well as themen from the Dale east of Markfleet, the men from the Lithe, from Mossfell, and from the Rangriver vales, tookpaths which converged sooner or later till they all metin Laugardale, the site of the Geysers, and thence wenton by one road to the Althing. The Eastfirthers goingto the Althing after the Burning had to ride rightthrough their enemy’s country, and we know that theyrode in force enough to turn slightly aside at Tongue, and to humble Asgrim’s pride. After this topographical description we may turn fromthe place itself to the main cause which drew this great</p>
<p>of Gils with Thordisa, the heiress of Guðlaugr, the last of the Straumfirthers, whose mother was Thorkatla, the granddaughter and heiressof Snorri the priest. See the Genealogy of the Sturlúngs inthe Tables at the end of Landnáma, Kph. 1843.</p>
<p>gathering together year by year. The great business ofthe Althing, no doubt, was law. For law purposes it wasestablished, and for law it was maintained. It is therefore time that we should enter a little into Icelandiclaw, or at least into so much of that vast body of jurisprudence which serves to illustrate our Saga. Ourreaders will bear in mind that the legal constitution of Iceland, at the time of which we write, consisted of a Court of Laws or High Court (Lögretta), which was the Deliberative Assembly. There it was that all changesin the existing law were brought forward and passed, butthat the judicial power, the Courts of Law proper, werethe four Quarter Courts Fjórðungsdómr, each consistingof thirty-six judges named by the priests, in the waybefore described, and that the judges were bound to beunanimous, or else no judgment could be passed. Let us now turn our attention to a trial before the Quarter Court. Every freeman in Iceland who felt himself aggrieved or injured in any of his rights, had threeways open to him to obtain redress. He might betakehimself at once to the man who had done him wrong, either in word or deed, either by his own mouth orhand, or by those of others incited by him, and afterlaying the grievance before him, demand a fine compensation and atonement in the way of money (bót). In</p>
<p>this case the matter almost took the shape of a friendlyarrangement, and the difference was soon arranged. Suchwere the dealings of Njal and Gunnar when the wives oneither side were goading on their servants and kinsmento manslaughter after manslaughter. Of this kind, too, was the compensation which Gunnar offered to Otkell for Hallgerda’s stealing, Hauskuld’s atonement to Thorarinfor the death of Glum, Njal’s sons’ claim against Thrainfor the wrongs which they had suffered for his sake in Norway, Njal’s fine for the killing of Thrain, and manyother like instances in our Saga. In such cases theinjured side was looked upon as completely reconciled, and, indeed, the intimation that the friendship of theinjuring would follow for the time to come the injuredparty, was often held out to induce the latter to showhimself easy in his terms of atonement. Those termswere usually drawn up by some man of acknowledgedworth and honesty, indifferent to either side, and thenformally accepted by both. But it sometimes happenedthat one or other side claimed what was called selfdoom (sjalfdæmi), that is the right to make his own award. This was one of the choices which Gunnar offered to Otkell, and which he was silly enough to refuse; andit was what Gunnar got at last as his right, after thesuit was set on foot. It was so great an honour, that</p>
<p>Njal advised him not to reject it, pointing out that thegreater the matter at stake the greater was the honourin taking it. But if the wrong-doer refused to make any compensation, there were still two ways left of dealing withhim. 1st, The injured party might fall back on hisright of private war, and take vengeance on him byfollowing up the feud, and by killing him or some nearmember of his family. Indeed this way lay opento him from the very first ; but in no state of society, however swift to shed blood, does war prevail overpeace, or society itself could not continue to exist, and we have therefore put the friendly arrangementfirst. Or 2d, he might follow it up at law, and somake the private wrong a matter for the consideration of the State. Here in fact we see the old freemanwaiving both his old natural rights—the right of property and the right of revenge—and appealing to thenew organization of things which he had accepted onthe establishment of a commonwealth. When Gizurthe white and Geir the priest agree that the quarrelagainst Gunnar for Otkell's slaying shall be followed upat law, they were waiving those natural rights ; andfurther on in the same quarrel, when Geir asks Gunnar ifhe is going to challenge him to the island, “and not bear</p>
<p>the law,” he alludes to the same feeling.* With regardto the steps in such a trial, our Saga gives us everyinformation. The Icelandic lawsuit was based on theevidence of the community, supported by oath. Atevery step solemn witness was taken, and to fail inproducing such witness was to lose the suit. Manytrials for manslaughter are recorded in Njal, but theone reported at fullest length is in the famous case ofthe suit set on foot after Njal’s Burning. There wesee how Mord rode to the spot where the deed wasdone and summoned nine neighbours who lived nearestto the spot† to serve on an inquest at the Althing. These neighbours at the trial formed what was calledthe Kvið or inquest, and upon their finding the guiltof the defendant depended. Those nearest to the spotwere summoned, like our old English jurors de vicineto, because they were supposed to be cognizant of allthe facts, and to have seen the deed done, or at</p>
<p>least to have been the first to hear that it had beendone. At the trial they heard no fresh evidence as tothe fact. In fact, they brought the evidence with them, and were jurors and witnesses in one. In the presenceof these men who, in cases when the suit was swiftlyset on foot, saw the bodies of the slain, which wereexhumed for the purpose, the plaintiff in the suittook solemn witness that he gave lawful notice of anassault against such and such a man, who fell on suchand such a man and gave him a death wound. Sotechnical was the Law in this respect, that it required theplaintiff to repeat this notice in almost the same words, putting the wounds first and the assault last, in orderthat it might be seen that the plaintiff was proceedingwith all the solemnity and exactness which the law required. Next, the plaintiff again took witness, that hesummoned those nine neighbours to ride to the Althingto sit on the inquest, to find whether the manslaughterhad been committed in the way which he had said, and bythe person whom he had named; and here again, the Lawrequired that this summons should be repeated, the plaintiff again putting the wounds first and the assault last. This was the first step in the trial, which was nowsaid to be “tilbúit,” set on foot, or hanging over the headsof the accused. It took its rise, as it will be seen, from</p>
<p>the very bosom of the community, and originated entirely with the next of kin, or nearest representatives ofthe slain, and with his nearest neighbours, as serving onthe inquest, and bearing evidence as witnesses. Therewas no State interference of any kind.* When the time came for the meeting of the Althing, on the Thursday when ten summer weeks were passed,† all the parties to the suit, as well as all the witnesses, and the nine neighbours who were to form the inquest, were bound to ride to the Althing. There the nextstep in the suit was the solemn notice (lýsning) givenfrom the Hill of Laws of the suit, and at the same timethe plaintiff asked formally in what Quarter Court thesuit lay, and in what district and in what house in the Quarter the defendant dwelt,‡ in order that the suitmight be brought before the proper tribunal. Thisnotice might be given on any day, so that it was fairly</p>
<p>early in the Thing, that the defendant might have duenotice. After that, the matter rested till the next Friday, when the Althing was nine days old. On that daythe judges went out to try causes.* Now, before the court solemnly set, and girt roundwith hallowed cords (vèbönd) running from stake tostake, the real pleading of the suit began. At the sametime, as we see from our Saga, a crowd of men stoodround without the verge of the sacred ring, and expressedby a deep hum of praise, and sometimes even by loudshouts of applause, their sympathy with one side or theother, and their sense of the skill displayed in the conduct of the cause. No judge nor usher then interferedto stifle those outbursts of popular feeling, which werepart of the Northman’s free and open nature. Havingsettled by lot his right to begin with others who hadlike suits, the plaintiff took witness, and bade the defendant to listen to his oath. Then he took his oath, and called on the defendant to listen to the proceedings, and first to his oath, that he would plead the suit in themost fair and lawful way. Then he called his witnessesto the fact, that he had on the spot given notice of a suitfor manslaughter against the defendant. Next those</p>
<p>witnesses came forward, and bore witness that the plaintiff had taken them to witness of the notice given on thespot, in both cases the plaintiff and witnesses repeatingthe form of words, that they might be caught trippingif their evidence did not agree. The plaintiff then tookwitness, and bade the nine neighbours who were to formthe inquest, to take their seats west on the river bank, and called on the defendant to challenge the inquest (rýðja kviðin), if he had any lawful cause. With this step the opening of the plaintiff’s case orpleading ceased, and after taking witness that all thelawful steps and proofs had been brought in in dueform, he left it to the defendant to challenge the inquest. It was now the defendant’s turn to try to findsome flaw in the plaintiff’s case thus reduced to legalform. He began by taking technical objections to theconstitution of the inquest. In Njal’s case the firstobjection raised was to two of the inquest on the scoreof relationship to the plaintiff. One, it seems, was hissecond cousin, and so likely to be partial. The otherwas his relation by baptism, which was reckoned a stillmore binding tie than cousinship. This demurrer wouldhave been fatal to the suit had it not been met by thereply, which was ruled to be good at law, that thesechallenges must be made for kinship to the true plain-</p>
<p>tiff, the real next of kin, and not, as in the case before the Court, to one who was conducting the suit on his part. The defendant might also challenge any of the inquestfor not being really householders, and did so in Njal’scase, but this challenge was overruled, on the groundthat lodgers and tenants might still sit on an inquest ifthey possessed a certain amount of property. The defendant might also challenge the inquest because theywere not all of them actually the nearest neighbours tothe spot where the deed was done, and the law was veryjealous on this point. In Njal’s case four had been thuswrongfully summoned, and the suit seemed to havebroken down, when the dexterity of the plaintiff’s adviserdevised a lawful remedy, though the device showed anamount of legal knowledge which it was thought thatfew or none possessed, and which was only declared to belaw by the opinion of the Speaker of the Law asked andgiven. According to his ruling, it was good law thatfive out of the nine men on the inquest could still uttertheir finding, though four had been challenged and setaside. The plaintiff was subject to a heavy fine for everyman that he had summoned wrongfully, but that hadnothing to do with the case before the Court. A baremajority of the nine might make a quorum, and the suitwas still alive.</p>
<p>When the legal cunning of the defendant had exhausted all such challenges, and failed to find a flaw inthe plaintiff's case, the plaintiff went on, and called onthe inquest to utter their finding. This they proceededto do, stating that they had been summoned by theplaintiff &quot;to bear witness,&quot; and utter a finding whethersuch and such a man, naming the defendant, had assaulted, wounded, and slain such and such other man, naminghim also by name. They had found their finding, andnow uttered it for or against the said defendant, as thecase might be. If for, the suit fell to the ground andcame to naught; if against, they were bound to repeattheir finding, uttering it first as to the wounds and lastas to the assault, that the law might catch them trippingif it could. The plaintiff then went before the Court, andtook witness that the inquest had uttered their findingagainst the defendant. He then summed up all thesteps taken in the suit, and called on the other side tobegin their defence, their efforts up to that time havingbeen confined to finding flaws in the plaintiff's pleading, or in the summoning and constitution of the inquest. The defendant then began his defence in due form, whichwas conducted with the same amount of witness-bearing and oath-taking, and the same legal repetitions asmarked the plaintiff's case. If he could succeed in</p>
<p>setting up a defence on the merits of the case, or atechnical one on the jurisdiction or constitution of thecourt, he stopped the progress of the suit, and it fell tothe ground. On technical grounds, the defendant in Njal’s case forbade the judges to hear the suit by a protest made before a priest, “according to the commoncustom of the Althing and the law of the land.” Theprotest was followed by a demand that the court shouldpass judgment for the defence. If he failed in securingthe proper majority to override dissentients, he tried tosplit or divide the court (at vèfengja dóminn), and inthat case also the case of the plaintiff who had failed tosecure a majority on his side would lose his suit. If, on the other hand, the defence failed, or none wasset up in answer to the bidding of the plaintiff, one ofthe judges, whom we have called the foreman for wantof a better name, and over whose head, or standingbefore whom, the plaintiff had pleaded his case, thewitnesses borne their evidence, and the inquest utteredtheir finding, arose and summed up the whole proceedings, step by step.* After the summing up was over, theplaintiff took witness that he forbade the defendant toset up his defence, now that the case had been summed</p>
<p>up, and the foreman added this last step to his summingup. The plaintiff then took witness again, and prayedthe court to pass judgment, in which six at least, andno more than thirty-six judges must agree. The old Icelandic judges, in some of their functions, were like our jurymen, and like them, too, were boundto be unanimous. With an amount of common sense, however, which might well be imitated in some English jury cases, it was provided that if the minoritywho disagreed with the judgment of the majority wereonly one or two, they were bound, under a penalty ofcontempt of court, to side with the majority, but allowedto give reasons why they would have passed anothersentence, if they could have had their way. In this waythe maxim of another system of Jurisprudence, “de minimis non curat lex,” was enforced in Iceland, the minoritysaved their conscience by a protest, and justice, according to the opinion of the majority, was done. Noobstinate enduring juryman on the wrong side could, under that system, have forced eleven weak and fastingwretches to side with him in spite of right and justice. plaintiff and another for the defendant. When judgment was at lastgiven, if it were for the plaintiff, his foreman uttered the judgmentin the name of the whole court, and the rest assented; if it were forthe defendant, his foreman, who had summed up his defence, utteredthe judgment of the court in his favour.</p>
<p>But if, on the other hand, there was what we shouldcall a respectable minority, if six out of the thirty-six, thatbeing the number requisite to form a quorum of the judges, or if more than six were on one side and six or more againstthem, this was such a marked difference of opinion on the Bench as to form what was called vèfang,* and the judgeswere said (at ganga til vèfangs) to go to a division. Theyparted into two bodies, and could pass no judgment, because all lawful judgments must be unanimous. Theplaintiff, therefore, was non-suited, not from any fault ofhis own, because the court was divided in opinion. If thisoccurred in an under court at the Spring Thing or the Quarter Thing, the matter might be brought afresh beforethe Quarter Courts at the Althing, and then and therejustice might be done ; but what if it occurred at the Quarter Court itself? In that case the law was bankrupt, as Maurer says, and men had to look to their oldremedy, the sword, if they wished to be righted. Alongwith the new system of law which had sprung up since</p>
<p>Ulfjot’s days, there was, no doubt, much that shockedthe free spirit of the people, who saw themselves shackledand trammelled by legal principles which they couldnot understand, but which, when applied, they felt werevery grievous. It was no doubt a hardship for menwhose forefathers were wont to settle such matters bystrength of arm, trusting in Odin’s help, to find thatthe help and cunning of man availed them so little thatafter pursuing suits from one court to another, andhoping vainly for justice, they were to be told the lawcould not help them, and that they had no legal remedy, because the judges could not agree. Besides this evil, which was inherent in the law itself, came the abusesof the law—the bribery, chicanery, and false swearing, which will ever follow in the train of law, so long as theheart of man is what it is. In fact, the law in Iceland, after having been in force about seventy years, no longersatisfied the people so far as trials were concerned, andthe system which had been introduced to tame and regulatethe old system of trial by wager of battle had broken down.*</p>
<p>In our sketch of a trial before the Quarter Court, atthe Althing, we have purposely omitted one very important feature of these proceedings, only that we might</p>
<p>return to it, and impress it more forcibly on the reader'sattention. This was the fact that both plaintiff anddefendant might hand over the pleading or the defenceto any other person whom they chose.* This was donein Njal's case, and in many other cases in our Saga, andthe reason of it will be plain to every one who hastaken the pains to follow the steps of the suit. It wasno easy thing to plead the simplest suit in Icelandic Law, it required a good head and sound memory, andgreat skill in all the technicalities of the law, not merelyto meet the questions and quibbles of the defence, buteven to state one's own case step by step, taking oathafter oath, and calling witness after witness, withoutmaking a false step. A man might have the bestcase in the world or the best defence, and yet failfor want of power to plead it, or to defend it. On suchoccasions, the services of what we should now call acounsel learned in the law, were absolutely necessary, and in our Saga we see that Flosi and the Burners</p>
<p>been an undoubted right that any man who could gather togethersufficient strength might force his way to where the Court wassitting, and there break it up, and so stop its sentence. Compare Hrafnkell's case, further on.</p>
<p>having no such man among their friends and kinsmenwere forced to obtain by a heavy fee the help of a greatlawyer from the other end of Iceland. In short, themaxim of English lawyers, that he who pleads his owncause has a fool for his client, was as well understood onthe banks of Axewater as on those of the Thames, andthus the whole community were handed over to thepower of these law-skilled men, of these counsel learnedin the law, who employed, as we have seen, every quirkand quibble in pleading or defending the cause of theirclients. It is no wonder then, that with the old rightof wager of battle still existing in the back ground, weshould find such men as Hrut challenging Mord, whenlegal chicanery is employed against him, or Gunnar Hrut when he is met by a legal quibble as to a flaw insummoning a witness. As society grew, and the Icelandic Commonwealth shot up, law grew and flourishedwith it, with its full crop of technicalities and specialpleading; and as we have seen it would be easy fora man with the simplest case to be tripped up bythe cunning of an adversary who was either a goodlawyer himself, or had persuaded some law-skilledman like Mord Valgard's son to take up his suit. When to this is added the fact that even if a defendant failed in setting up a legal defence, he might</p>
<p>so perplex the minds of the judges as to divide thecourt in opinion, and render any judgment impossible, since a time-honoured principle of Northern Lawrequired that all the judges should be unanimous ; andthat thus a plaintiff’s suit, after all the pains he had takento bring his witnesses and inquest to the spot, and tosecure its safe conduct by handing it over to a goodlawyer to plead, might still come to naught, becausethere was no higher court to which it could be carried.— When all this could happen, it was no wonder, we sayagain, that men should be disinclined to try their suitsat law at all, but rather resolve to fall back to the oldduel and seek their rights, as they told Njal, “by pointand edge,” or, as we should say in plain English, “bycut and thrust.” It was this public need we may be sure, and notthat idle story told by the Saga-teller about Hauskuld Thrain’s son’s marriage, that induced Njal, the greatlawyer, and the man of unstained honour and worth, tocome forward with a remedy for an evil which he musthave looked upon with alarm as a great stride backwardstowards the old domain of barbarism. Law might haveits evils, but it was at any rate better than lawlessness, which wastes a land and robs her of her best and bravestsons. “Let wise heads, therefore,” said Njal, “meeting in</p>
<p>the Court of Laws&quot;—in which, though no priest, heclearly had a seat—&quot;devise a remedy for this great evil.&quot; When called on to state his views, he brought forwardhis famous project for the establishment of a Fifth Court, into which suits arising out of those very evils ofwhich the freemen complained were to be tried. First of all, the new court was to hear all matters of Contempt of the Thing,* such as the bearing of false witnessor uttering a false finding ; all wilful deviations from thepath of public duty at the Althing, under which generalhead, any attempt to break up the Courts by force wouldbe included ; all bribery and corruption, either on the partof the briber and the bribed, for help in suits ; and thoughlast not least, all those suits in which the judges of the Quarter Courts were divided in opinion, and could arriveat no decision according to the old principles of the law. The proceedings of the new court were to be</p>
<p>attended with the strongest and most binding oaths, and two vouchers were to follow every oath so taken bythe parties, who were to back on their word of honour oron their oath the truth of what the others swore. Thenumber of the judges was increased, and four twelveswere to be named to sit as judges in the new court ; butas the old principle of three twelves was still regardedas a thing too holy to touch, twelve of these were to bechallenged and set aside, six by the plaintiff and six bythe defendant, or the whole twelve by the plaintiff ifthe defendant, when called on, refused to exercise hisright. In this way the great grievance of the commonwealth was cured by the erection of a Court of Appeal, as well as by a most important rule of the new tribunal, which provided that the judges were no longer tovote unanimously, but were allowed to divide and todecide by a majority. At the same time by making thenew court the tribunal before which all cases of contempt of the Thing were to come, cases which weredefined to be just that very bribery, corruption, chicanery, and false swearing, of which the common man complained, the excuse for resorting to the old system ofpoint and edge was cut away, for no man could now saythat it was impossible to get his rights except by thesword ; and, as a matter of fact, we find duelling as a</p>
<p>legal remedy done away with by law almost immediatelyafter the institution of the Fifth Court, while the oldright of scattering the court by main force became oneof those cases of contempt of the Thing of which thenew tribunal was to take cognizance. But as the number of witnesses, judges and freemen fitted to serve on the inquest, was already almostenough to exhaust the resources of the old priesthoods, it was resolved to erect new priesthoods, in order tofind witnesses, judges, and inquests for the new court. One of these new priesthoods Hauskuld Njal's fosterchild was chosen to fill, and this fact, no doubt, ledto the story, told either by some one incapable of comprehending Njal's public spirit, or perhaps wilfully bysome enemy to the new scheme, that Njal had devisedthe whole scheme merely as a means to get a priesthood and a good match for his foster-child. We say an enemy, because the plan could not havebeen very grateful to the possessors of the old priesthoods, who now saw their monopoly invaded, and alarge portion of their power transferred to rivals whowould have the power of naming the judges in a courthigher than any of their own. It also attacked them intheir local districts at home, the real seat of their power, by making a reality of what was only before a shadow,</p>
<p>the right of every Thingman to leave his priest’s Thingif he chose. Here was not only the principle assertedafresh, but a way shown and a means provided of making it earnest. No wonder then that the old priests, whose power, it must be remembered, had not long beforereceived a terrible blow, aimed at its very heart, on the Change of Faith, were vexed at the innovation, andthat stubborn heathens like Valgard the guileful wereanxious to avenge the wrong which they had received on the author of the change, and on thosenearest and dearest to him. It is probable too thatthe discontent amongst suitors, of which our Sagaspeaks, was much more serious than it would appearfrom the way in which it is told, and that the priestswho filled the Court of Laws were terrified by popularclamour into yielding their assent so readily to Njal’sscheme; but even he could not carry out his wishes tothe full. The most radical alteration which he proposedat the same time, was contained in his proposal, that inthe Court of Laws those only should have the right ofvoting who sat on the middle bench, but that those onlyshould be chosen to sit on that bench who were wisestand best. This was the hardest blow ever aimed at theold system of influence exercised by the priests, andhad it been fully carried out, their power as legislators</p>
<p>must have ceased to exist; but, by one of those dexterous turns which a governing body so well knows togive to a proposition for reform, part only of Njal'splan became law, while part was dropped. The rightof voting was restricted to those who sat on themiddle bench, but the “ best and wisest” were notchosen to sit on it; the priests kept their right ofsitting on that bench as before; and thus that halfof Njal's proposition which was carried into effectonly tended to strengthen still more the power of theruling aristocracy. But we have still something more to tell of an Icelandic trial. After judgment was given against thedefendant, he was termed “ sekr,” “ guilty” or “ convicted,” and the plaintiff then went on to make hisadversary an outlaw, if the offence was such as to calldown that punishment. This was done by formal noticeat the Hill of Laws, but the sentence was not complete— he was not alsekr, not an out and out outlaw, so long asthe Court of Execution, Fèránsdómr, had not been held. Such a court seems to have been held on all convicts, even in cases where the sentence only amounted tobanishment from a particular district of the island ; butin graver offences it depended on the result of thatcourt of inquisition whether the convict was to be a</p>
<p>lesser outlaw, fjörbaugsmaðr, or a thorough outlaw, skógmaðr. If he had property enough to pay his debts, his wife’s dower—supposing him to be married—thefines to which he had been sentenced, and the priest’sfee, and bail,* if he could do all this, he had three placesof asylum granted to him for three years, till he could geta passage to foreign parts, to fulfil the three years’ exilewhich was the sentence of the Court in cases punishableby the lesser outlawry. No man could touch him on hisway to or from those places of refuge, or to or from theship; nor might any shipmaster refuse him a passage, under peril of falling into outlawry himself.† On hisreturn after three years’ absence he was a free man andrestored to all his rights, but if he could not get apassage before three years were spent, he fell intothorough outlawry, and his life was at any man’s mercywho could take it. So too, if at the Court of Execution he could not satisfy the claims above mentioned,</p>
<p>and especially, if he could not pay the priest’s fine, hebecame at once a thorough outlaw (skógmaðr), and wasforced to fly the haunts of men. This Court was to beheld at the outlaw’s own abode, within fourteen daysafter the last day of the Althing (eptir vápnatak), that is, after men took their arms, which they weresupposed not to use during the peace which was proclaimed while the Thing lasted, and rode away home. But it was no easy thing to hold such a court at agreat chief’s house who, when outlawed, either in hispresence or absence at the Althing, might gathersuch a band of followers around him as to set theplaintiff and the law at defiance. The law providedagainst this by giving the community an interest in halfof the goods forfeited by the outlaw, the plaintiff beingentitled to the other half, and the Priest of the districtwas bound to put the law in force by a formal process, in which all the technicalities of witnesses, oaths, andformularies, were again repeated. In cases where theoutlaw was the Priest of the district itself, the plaintiffmight obtain the help of some other Priest, and put thelaw in execution by main force. This was the case withthe great chief of the east country, Hrafnkell Frey’s Priest, who having been taken unawares at the Althingby an adversary, who had brought a charge of man-</p>
<p>slaughter against him, and outlawed before he could getto the court and scatter it with an armed band, rode offhome, and hoped to set the law at defiance. It was along ride to Hrafnkelstede in Jokulsdalewater in theeast, but the plaintiff and his band, eighty in number, had just reached the spot on the morning of the lastday left for execution. Having broken into the house, Hrafnkell being now again taken unawares, they seizedhim and his men in their beds, eight of them inall. Hrafnkell begged them to spare his men's life, and that he might not be treated with indignity, but theythrew a rope from the main building to an outhouse, cut holes through the waistbands of their hose, passedthe rope through the holes, and so strung them all up ina row, with their heads hanging down on one side ofthe rope and their heels on the other. Having treated Hrafnkell thus, whose crime was one which called downat once the highest sentence of the law, they proceededto hold the Court of Execution in due form. This wascalled at heyja féránsdóm. The court sat a bowshot offthe dwellings of men, on some stony hill where there wasneither cornfield nor mead (hvártki akr nè eng). It wasto be held at noon, when the sun was due south. Afterthis step had been taken, the outlawry was complete, andunless certain stipulations had been made concerning it,</p>
<p>as that the outlaw should go abroad for ever, or for aterm of years, and keep his lands on his return, or unlessat the Court of Execution he had brought in his fine tothe priest, and his bail, which allowed him an asylumin certain places while he stayed in the country, hebecame a thorough outlaw, and his life was at themercy of the plaintiff, or any other man of the community who could kill him. In the case of Hrafnkellthe plaintiff Sam, who was a man of easy nature, gave Hrafnkell his life, after taking him down from the rope, on condition that he should give up all his property, a little of which only was restored to him, and thenbanished him the district.* This was quite againstthe advice of his friend the priest of Thorskafirth, Thorkell of the lock, who knowing the characters ofboth the men, foresaw that Hrafnkell would thrivewherever he was, but that Sam, the plaintiff, could notcontend with him. His foresight was verified, forthough Sam took Hrafnkell’s priesthood from him, andhis Thingmen joined him, Hrafnkell lost no time insetting up another priesthood close by, where hebecame shortly thriving and prosperous, and at last tookample revenge on Sam.</p>
<p>This execution and forfeiture, with the greater orlesser outlawry consequent on it, was the end of a trialfor manslaughter, carried to its full length, but we thinkthat these suits rarely went so far at the time of whichwe write. The tendency of the whole Icelandic legislation was not to put forth the full force of the law, but rather to make matters up. Even the banishmentfor three years was looked upon as a means of preventing bloodshed, by removing the hot-headed and overbearing, as well as those who, like Gunnar of Lithend, had fallen into quarrels for no fault of their own, for awhile from the scene of strife. The Icelandic codetook no pleasure in the death of a man, but ratheraimed at saving his life for the good of the land. In a state of society where the great chiefs who hadcauses of their own to defend, or causes of their Thingmen to protect, rode thither with many men at theirback, a private quarrel soon became that of a wholedistrict. So long as the two appeals to law and battlestood open, the party which felt itself weak at lawthought nothing of breaking up the court by forceof arms, and in Hrafnkell's case it is expressly statedthat he meant to teach these little men a lesson, whodared to strive at law with him, and called on hismen to follow him, and break up the court, and drive</p>
<p>Sam from the suit.* From several suits in Njal, as wellas from the fact of the battle at the Althing, after the suitfor the Burning itself, we see that this was a dangeralways to be dreaded, and therefore it was natural thatthe more peaceably disposed, and less hot-headed chiefs, “ the good men and true,” as they are termed, like Njal, Hall of the Side, Hjallti, Snorri the priest, and others, should ever be on the watch to step in and make mattersup, and stop a suit which might draw on a battle royalat any moment, or which, if carried out to the very letterof the law, might lead to local brawls in the attemptto put the sentence into execution. This no doubtwas Snorri’s feeling, when, as one of the daysmen orarbitrators, he told Gudmund the powerful that he wasfor awarding neither the greater nor the lesser outlawry. He would neither make Njal’s sons fjörbaugsmenn, norskógmenn, but inflict a fine which would settle thequarrel at once and for ever. This truth will come morefully home to the reader’s mind, if he reflects, that in allthe many lawsuits in Njal, not one was carried to itsfull length. They were all settled by the award of daysmen and arbitrators, who laid down such terms as they</p>
<p>thought would meet the justice of each particular</p>
<p>When such an award was uttered on any stage ofthe suit, the two sides were not thought fully atoned (allsáttir) until they had granted one another pledges ofpeace.* The formularies of these pledges are extremelyinteresting, and no doubt are some of the earliest documents of the kind in existence. The following is takenfrom one of the earliest Sagas,† and its original heathencharacter peeps out through the very slight Christiancovering which has been thrown over it. This was thepeace-telling that the worldly-wise Snorri got Thorgils, one of the greatest lawyers of the time, to utter in aquarrel.</p>
<p>“This is the beginning of our peace-telling, that aswe are all atoned with God, so shall we be all menatoned and reconciled, the one to the other, at meat andat drink, at market and meeting, at church-door and inkingshall, and whatever place else men meet together. We shall be so agreed as though there had never beenquarrel between us. We shall share knife and steak, andall things else between us, as friends and not foes. If</p>
<p>strife arises henceforth between us, then fines shall be paid, but not blade reddened ; but that man of our band whobreaks the peace now made, and slays after pledges given, he shall be driven away as a wolf, and chased so far as menchase wolves farthest, or as Christian men seek churches, heathen men worship in shrines, fires burn, earth bringsforth seed, maid calls ‘mother,’ ships skim the sea, shieldsshine, sunbeam melts snow, Finns glide on snowshoon, firgrows, hawk flies a summer day with a fair wind beneathboth his wings, heaven bends over us, earth is peopled, winds rise, waters run into the sea, and men sow corn. He shall be banished from churches and Christian men, from God’s house and soil, from every home save hell. Each of us takes pledges from the other, for himselfand his heirs, born and unborn, begotten and unbegotten, named and unnamed ; and each of us grants in histurn life-pledges and lasting pledges, meet pledges andmighty pledges, which shall ever be kept, so long asearth lasts and men live upon it. Now are we atonedand agreed, wherever we meet, on land or on lake, onship or on skate, on sea or on steed— ‘ Partners of oars, And partners of pumps, On thwart and at thole, If help there be needed.’ Agreed on even terms one with another, as son with</p>
<p>father, or father with son, in all our dealings. Nowshake hands on our peace-telling, and so let us keepwell these pledges at Christ's will, and at the witnessof all men who have now heard our pledgetelling. Mayhe have God's love who keeps these pledges, and he God's wrath who breaks rightful pledges. We havebeen atoned with our whole hearts; and may God beatoned with all of us.&quot; The man who broke such solemn pledges as these, was looked upon as a dastardly truce-breaker (griðníð- íngr), and was looked upon as for ever dishonoured anddisgraced.*</p>
<h3>THE ICELANDERS ABROAD.</h3>
<p>If we follow these islanders abroad, we shall findthat they were welcome wherever they went. In thecourts and body-guards of kings and earls no man ofmark amongst these Icelanders ever failed to prove hismentioned, however, that Gísli Brynjulfsson in his very ableessay, “Om Haavard og hans Viser,” appended to the new editionof Havard’s Saga, Kph. 1860, warmly expresses his agreement with Maurer on this point, and goes so far as to see in these lögmenna class invested with an authority resembling that exercised bythe Roman tribunes, and representing a principle in the Icelandiccommonwealth antagonistic to the supremacy of the priests. Healso assumes that these lögmenn were the foremen (reifingarmenn) on the bench of judges, and that they were little Mimers, inwhose heads lay springs of legal knowledge and traditional lawwelling out for the good of the public, and he explains theexpression in Njála, “over the head of John,” vol. ii. p. 245, notas a standing name in the Icelandic formularies, answering to our M or N, but as referring to St. John’s head, who had succeededin Christian, to the part played by Mimer’s head in heathentimes. Whether this explanation be not more fanciful than trueis open to discussion ; but we must not omit to mention, that inthe same passage Gísli Brynjulfsson has rightly pointed out thatthe “ kviðr” or “ inquest” must not be confounded with the English jury in its present shape. To that the Icelandic judgesrather answered. The kviðr, on the other hand, is very nearlyidentical with the old English jury de vicineto, whose functionswere rather to find the accused guilty on evidence which theythemselves brought before the court, than to find him guilty afterhearing the evidence of others. In our translation the difficultyhas been avoided by rendering the word “ kviðr” by “ inquest,”</p>
<p>clxxii. THE ICELANDERS ABROAD.</p>
<p>right to an honourable seat on one of the benches in thehall. Hrut, the good swordsman and foreseeing man, issoon received as one of King Harold Grayfell’s henchmen ; it is true he owed this honour to Gunnhilda’sfavour, but that patronage was thrust upon him by thepassion of that wicked queen, and he would have wonhis way to the king’s body-guard without her help. Gunnar is too proud to stand before Earl Hacon till hehas won fame for himself, and goes eastward ho, anddoes many deeds of derring do before he returns to standpeerless amongst the champions of King Harold Gorm’sson in Denmark, and afterwards to shine first and foremost among the followers of the wicked Earl. Njal’ssons, Grim and Helgi, are taken by Kari to Earl Sigurd’scourt on the mainland of Orkney, and there do the earlgood service by their foresight and strength of arm. When they left the Orkneys for Norway, we may feelsure that they would have been equally well receivedby Earl Hacon, had not Thrain’s treachery to his liegelord in harbouring his outlaw Hrapp, thrown them intoa quarrel which was none of their own seeking, and sospoilt their chance of honour at the court of Hladir.</p>
<p>a body which in early times had legal functions answering prettymuch to those discharged by the Icelandic kviðr, and which inparochial and municipal matters still retains them in some partsof England at the present day.</p>
<p>Even the overbearing Hrapp was welcome as an Icelander in Gudbrand’s hall, and had a seat of honourassigned him over against the high seat of the chief. Had he not betrayed his host, and dealt shamefully byhis daughter, he would have been welcome so long as hechose to stay, not only in obedience to that general law ofhospitality, to which he appealed, but much more for theamusement and information, which, as an Icelander, hewas able to afford to the dwellers in that Norway dale. Lastly, when Flosi and the Burners fare abroad, and arethrown against their will upon the wild shore of Hrossey, as soon as the first burst of the Earl’s anger has passedaway, they are received into high favour, and Flosi fillsthe place in the body-guard which Helgi had held before. The gallant Kari had long been known in Orkney, hisfather Solmund, before he settled down on the Hrunamennahrepp on the south-west of Iceland, had lingeredin Orkney for a while after he left Norway, and thither Kari seems to have returned at an early age, and soon tohave made his way to fame and fortune. He was clearly astranger to Njal sons when they first met, and then filledthe dangerous office of Earl Hacon’s skatt-gatherer inthose Western lands.* From these, and numberless other</p>
<p>instances, it is plain that the Icelanders were lookedupon as the first and foremost of the Scandinavian race.</p>
<p>free and independent footing on which the Icelander, when abroad, stood with the princes of his time. It is a thoroughly genuine narrative, and occurs in the Saga of King Harold the stern, who fell atthe battle of Stamford Bridge in 1066, and who showed more favourto Icelanders than any of the kings of Norway :—</p>
<p>“ AUDUN AND HIS WHITE BEAR.</p>
<p>“ There was a man named Audun, an Icelander and westfirther; his means were small, but his goodness was well known. This Audun once sailed from Iceland with a Norseman whose name was Thorir, but before he went he made over almost all his goods to hismother, and after all they were not more than enough to keep her fortwo years. After that they put to sea with a fair breeze, and soonmade Norway. Audun stayed with Thorir that winter, and nextsummer they both sailed out to Greenland, and were there the nextwinter. There Audun bought a white bear well tamed, and hegave for the beast all the money he had—for it was the greatesttreasure of a bear that had ever been heard of.</p>
<p>“ Next summer they sailed back to Norway, and had a goodvoyage; as for Thorir, the captain, he went back to his own house; but Audun got himself a passage east to The Bay in the Cattegat, andtook his bear with him, and looked about for a lodging while hestayed there, for he meant to make his way south to Denmark, andgive the bear to King Sweyn. But just then the war and strifebetween King Harold and Sweyn was at its height. It happened, too, that Harold was then in the town whither Audun came, andhe soon heard how an Icelander had come from Greenland withsuch a tame white bear! The king sent at once for Audun, so hewent before the king and greeted him. The king took his wordswell, and asked—</p>
<p>They combined in a wonderful degree, the dash, anddaring, and genius of the Athenian, with the deliberate</p>
<p>“ ‘Hast thou that white bear which is such a treasure?’ “ ‘I have,’ said Audun. “ The king said—‘Wilt thou sell us the beast for the same pricethou gavest for it?’ “ ‘I will not do that, lord,’ said Audun. “ ‘Wilt thou,’ says the king, ‘that I give thee twice as much, and that is fairer, if indeed thou gavest for it all thy money?’ “ ‘I will not do that, lord,’ he said. “ ‘Wilt thou give it me, then?’ says the king. “ ‘That, too, I will not do,’ says the Icelander. “ ‘What wilt thou do with it, then?’ said the king. “ Audun answers, ‘What I have already made up my mind todo; go south to Denmark, and give it to King Sweyn.’ “ Then King Harold said, ‘Is it now that thou art so ignoranta man that thou hast not heard of all this war and strife which isbetween the lands here, or dost thou think thy luck so great thatthou wilt be able to bring this treasure to King Sweyn when otherscannot get to his land without trouble, even when need forces them “ Audun answers, ‘Lord, this now lies in your power, but I willsay yes to no other way than the one I have already spoken of, andmade up my mind to follow.’ “ Then the king said: ‘I see no reason why thou shouldst not goas thou pleasest, but I make this bargain that thou comest here tome when thou gettest back, and tellest me how King Sweyn rewarded thee for the beast. May be thou art a man of luck.’ “ ‘I’ll give you my word to do that,’ said Audun. And awayhe went, and got a passage south to Denmark. But when he gotthere every penny of his money was spent, and he had to beg for</p>
<p>valour and mother wit of the Spartan mind.* Theywere man by man, unit by unit, what their kinsmen</p>
<p>in Normandy became afterwards as a nation,—boldas lions, but wary as foxes, tough as the ash, but pliant</p>
<p>Norway, but before that I came from Greenland. My errand hitherwas to give you this white bear, which I bought out there in Greenland with all my goods; but a great change has befallen me, fornow I own no more than half the beast.’ “ After that he told the king the whole story, and all that passedbetween him and Auki. “ Then the king said: ‘ Is this true, Auki, what he says ?’ “ ‘ True it is,’ says Auki. “ Then the king said: ‘ And thoughtest thou it fell to thee, when I had set thee over my goods and given thee great place, to tax andtoll what an outlander and a stranger had undertaken to bring meas a treasure—who gave for it all his goods, and that too when ourgreatest foes thought it good to let him go on his way in peace? Think, now, how faithless it was in thee to do such a thing, and seewhat a great difference there is between thee and Harold, when hegave him safe conduct. And now it were meet thou shouldst lose, not only all thy goods, but thy life also; and though I will not slaythee this time, still thou shalt go away at once on the spot a beggarfrom my realm, and never come more únto my sight. But for thee, Icelander, as thou hast given me the whole of the beast, and thatworth far more than the food which Auki sold, but which he oughtto have given thee, I accept it, and ask thee to stay here with “ Then Audun thanked the king for his words and invitation, andstayed there awhile, but Auki went away unhappy, and lost greatgoods because he coveted that which did not belong to him. “ Audun had only been with King Sweyn a little while whenhe said he was eager to go away. The king was rather slow inanswering him.</p>
<p>as the bow; no feat was too daring for their courageto attempt, and no race in any time, whether ancient</p>
<p>“ ‘What wilt thou do, then?’ he asked, ‘if thou wilt not bewith us?’ “ ‘I will go south to Rome,’ he says. “ Then the king said: “ ‘Hadst thou not taken such good counsel, I had been veryangry at thy eagerness to go away, but now thou shalt not bethwarted in the least.’ “ So the king gave him much silver, and settled all about hisjourney, and put him in the way of going in company with otherpilgrims, and bade him to come to see him when he came back. “ So Audun went south; but when he was coming back he tooka great sickness, and lay long a-bed. All the money was spentwhich Sweyn had given him, and his companions went on and lefthim. At last he rose from his sickness, and was quite thin andweak, nor had he a penny to buy food. Then he took a beggar’swandering, and went along begging his food, till he came back to Denmark about Easter, to a town where King Sweyn happened tobe. By this time Audun had his hair close cropped, and scarce arag to his back, vile and poor in every way; and so he dared notshow himself among the throng of men. He hung about the cloistersof the church, and thought to choose his time to meet the king whenhe went to Nones; but when he saw the king coming and his trainso bravely dressed, he was ashamed to show himself before theireyes. But when the king had sat down to the board, Audun wentand took his meat outside under the wall of the hall, as is pilgrims’ wont, so long as they have not thrown away staff and scrip. Andnow he made up his mind to throw himself in the king’s way as hewent to even-song; but, so bold as this seemed to him earlier in theday, just half as bold again must he have been to let the king see</p>
<p>or modern, has ever shown greater aptness in suitingthemselves, at the shortest notice, to the peculiar cir-</p>
<p>him now that they had well drunk. So, when Audun saw themcoming, he turned short off and ran away to hide himself. But theking thought he caught a glimpse of a man, and as he came out ofchurch, and all his train had come inside their lodging, he turnedround and went out again, and called out with a loud voice as soonas he was out of doors :— “ ‘If there be any man near here, as methinks there is, whowishes to see me, and has hardly heart to do so, let him come forward now and let himself be seen.’ “ Then Audun came forward, and fell at the king’s feet. Theking knew him at once, and took him by the hand and bade himwelcome. “ ‘ And now,’ he says, ‘ thou art greatly changed since we sawone another last, for I scarce knew thee!’ “ So the king led him into the hall there and then; but all theking’s train laughed at Audun as soon as they saw him. But theking said,— “ ‘ Ye have no need to laugh at him, vile and mean though heseems to ye to look on; he hath seen better to his soul’s healththan ye, and therefore to God’s eye he will seem bright and “ Then the king made them get ready a bath, and waited on himwith his own hands, and gave him afterwards good clothes, andmade much of him in every way. So Audun soon got back hisstrength and health, for he was young in years, and there he stayedawhile. He knew, too, how to behave himself among the crowd ofmen; he was an easy-tempered, word-weighing man, and not givento gossip. So all men liked him, and as for King Sweyn he wasmost gracious to him.</p>
<p>cumstances of every case. The Saxons were no harehearted folk, their arms were as stalwart and their thews</p>
<p>“ So it fell out one day, when springtide was drawing on, thatthey two were talking together, and all at once the king said,— “ ‘ Sooth to say, Audun, I have never yet repaid thee in a waythou wouldest like by a gift in return for the white bear. And now, if thou wilt, thou shalt be free to stay long here with me, and I willmake thee my henchman; and, at the same time, treat thee honourably in all things.’ “ Audun answers, ‘ God thank you, lord, for your generous offer, and for all the honour you show me, but I have set my heart onsailing out to Iceland.’ “ ‘ This seems to me a most wonderful choice,’ said the king. “ Then Audun said, ‘ I can’t bear to think that I am sitting herewith you in great honour and happiness, while my mother trampsabout on the beggar’s path out yonder in Iceland; for now the timeis up, during which I gave her means to live, before I sailed awayfrom home.’ “ ‘ Spoken like a good man and true,’ answers the king, ‘ andno doubt thou wilt be a man of luck. This was the only thingwhich would not have misliked me, if thou hadst asked leave to goaway. But now stay here awhile with me, till the ships are beinggot ready.’ “ So Audun stayed. But, one day, when the spring was near athand, King Sweyn went down from the town to the landing-place, and then they saw men busy fitting out their ships for various lands, —east to Russia, or to Saxony, to Sweden, or to Norway. So Audun and the king came to a fair ship, and men were hard at workon her: she was a merchantman of fine size. “ Then the king said, ‘ What thinkest thou, Audun, of this ship?’ “ He said, ‘ She was fine enough.’</p>
<p>as strong as those of the men whom they met at Hastings, but their utmost efforts were powerless against the</p>
<p>“ ‘ Now,’ said the king, ‘ I will repay thee for the bear, and givethee this ship with a full lading of all that I know is handiest in Iceland.’ “ Audun thanked the king, as well as he could, for this gift ; butwhen time went on, and the ship was ready for sea, they two wentdown again to the strand, King Sweyn and Audun. Then the kingspoke,— “ ‘ Since thou wilt go away from me, Icelander, nothing shall nowbe done to hinder thee ; but I have heard tell that your land is illoff for havens, and that there are great shoals and risks for ships ; and now, if things do not turn out well, it may be that thy ship goesto pieces, and thy lading will be lost ; little then will be left to showthat thou hast met King Sweyn, and given him a thing of great price.’ “ As he said this, the king put into his hand a big leathern bag, full of silver, and said, ‘ Thou wilt not be now altogether pennilessthough thy ship goes to pieces, if thou only holdest this.’ “ ‘ May be, too,’ the king went on to say, ‘ that thou losest thismoney also, what good will it then have been to thee that thougavest King Sweyn thy treasure ? ’ “ As he said this, the king drew a ring of gold from his arm, andgave it to Audun ; that was a thing of costly price, and the kingwent on— “ ‘ Though things go so ill, that thy ship goes to pieces, and allthy goods and money be lost, still thou wilt not be penniless, ifthou comest to land with this ring, for it is often the wont of mento bear their gold about them, when they are in risk of shipwreck, and so it will be seen that thou hast met King Sweyn Wolfson, ifthou holdest fast the ring, though thou losest the rest of thy goods. And now I will give thee this bit of advice, never to part with this</p>
<p>serried ranks and improved tactics of Duke William andhis knights. The inert mass of Saxon nationality fell</p>
<p>ring, for I wish thee to enjoy it to the uttermost, unless thouthinkest thyself bound to repay so much goodness to some greatman as to deem it right that thou shouldest give him a great treasure. When thou findest such an one give him the ring, for it isworth a great man's while to own it; and now farewell, and luckfollow thy voyage.' That was what King Sweyn said. &quot; After that Audun put to sea, and ran into a haven in Norway, and as soon as he heard where King Harold was he setout to find him, as he had given his word. So Audun camebefore King Harold and greeted him, and the king took his greetingkindly. &quot; ' Sit here now and drink with us,' said the king. &quot; So Audun sat and drank. Then King Harold asked, ' Well, how did King Sweyn repay thee for the white bear ?' &quot; ' In that wise, lord,' says Audun, ' that he took it when I gave it.' &quot; ' In that wise I had repaid thee myself,' says the king. ' Whatmore did he give thee ?' &quot; ' He gave me silver to go south on pilgrimage.' &quot; The king answers: ' King Sweyn has given many a manbefore now silver to go south on pilgrimage, or to help his need, though he had not brought him things of price. What hast thoumore to say ?' &quot; ' He asked me,' answers Audun, ' to become his henchman, and to give me great honour if I stayed with him.' &quot; ' That was well spoken,' says the king; ' but he must haverepaid thee with more still.' &quot; Audun said: ' He gave me a big merchantman, full laden withthe best of freight.'</p>
<p>never to rise again on that blood-stained field, while thebanners of the Bastard’s chivalry passed lightly over itfrom victory to victory, until they had made the wholeland their own. The few names which we have marked on our mapof the Western Lands will show how thoroughly the Northman had made himself at home on British soil. The monks of Scilly in the far-west well knew, whenthey first sighted them in the offing, what the sails of</p>
<p>“ ‘That was a noble gift,’ says the king, ‘but I would havegiven thee as much; or did he give thee anything more?’ “ Audun answers: ‘He gave me, besides, a leathern bag full ofsilver, and said I would not then be penniless if I held fast to it, though my ship went to pieces off Iceland.’ “ ‘That was nobly thought of,’ answers the king, ‘and that I would not have done. I should have thought myself free if I hadgiven thee ship and lading. Gave he aught besides?’ “ ‘Yes, lord, he did,’ says Audun; ‘he gave me this ring which I have on my arm, and said it might so happen that I lost all mygoods and the ship too, and yet he said I should not be penniless if I still had the ring. He bade me also not to part with the ringunless I thought that I owed so much to some great man for hisgoodness that I ought to give it him; but now I have found thatman, for it was in your power, lord, to take my bear from me, andmy life too, but you let me go in peace to Denmark when no oneelse could get thither.’ “ The king took the ring blithely, and gave Audun good gifts inreturn before they parted. So Audun sailed to Iceland that verysummer, and all thought him the luckiest of men.”</p>
<p>a Viking fleet foreboded ; but it was at Scilly that thegreatest of all Vikings, Olaf Tryggvi’s son, afterwards King Olaf of Norway, first learnt the Christian’s creed, became converted at the teaching of those pious monks, and passed at once from the heathen sea-rover to themost zealous champion of the Cross. Ireland knewthem, Bretland or Wales knew them, England knewthem too well, and a great part of Scotland they hadmade their own. To this day the name of almost everyisland on the west coast of Scotland is either pure Norse, or Norse distorted so as to make it possible for Celticlips to utter it. The groups of Orkney and Shetland arenotoriously Norse, but Lewes and the Uists, and Skyeand Mull are no less Norse ; and not only the names ofthe islands themselves, but those of reefs and rocks andlakes and headlands* bear witness to the same relation, and show that, while the original inhabitants were notexpelled, but held in bondage as thralls, the Northmenmust have dwelt, and dwelt thickly upon them too, asconquerors and lords. The end of most conquests indeed is the same : time always asserts her sway, and theconquerors, a mere handful amongst the great mass of thepopulation, after leavening it with the best particles oftheir nature, and infusing a new life into the com-</p>
<p>munity, take to themselves the features and languageof the subject race; until after a separate existence, determined in its duration by the peculiar circumstancesof each case, a new language and nationality are formed, in which the characteristics of the captives are predominant.</p>
<h3>CONCLUSION.</h3>
<p>And now, after having sketched the physical features of the island, pointed out its first discoverers, explained how it was that the Northmen settled on it, dwelt on their faith, their social principles, their methodof settlement, their priesthoods, and petty kingdoms; having shown how they passed into a commonwealth, how they assumed a State and Provincial organization ; having given an account of the great families whichsettled in the district to which our Saga more particularly belongs; having brought the chief characters on thestage, and given a rapid outline of the chronology andplot of the piece; having shown how the Icelander inthe eleventh century was housed and lodged, how hespent his time, whether at home in his daily life, or yearby year in the great gatherings on the Thingfield; havingtraced the topography of that interesting spot, the veryheart of the Icelandic body politic, threaded the dark</p>
<p>labyrinths of Icelandic law, and then followed those bold Icelanders abroad to the courts of Kings and Earls ;— after all these proofs and proceedings have been broughtin, to use the language of Mord at the trial for the Burning, nothing remains but to sum up the whole case, and to state a few of its broad features before calling onthe public, that great inquest of the country, to uttertheir finding in Njal's favour, and to say that he is worthyof the pains which have been bestowed on his behalf. We are entitled to ask, then, in what work of any ageare the characters so boldly, and yet so delicately drawn ? Where shall we match the goodness and manliness of Gunnar, struggling with the storms of fate, and drivenon by the wickedness of Hallgerda into quarrel afterquarrel, which were none of his own seeking, but ledno less surely to his own end ? Where shall we match Hallgerda herself—that noble frame, so fair and tall, and yet with so foul a heart, the abode of all greatcrimes, and also the lurking place of tale-bearingand thieving ? Where shall we find parallels to Skarphedin's hastiness and readiness, as axe aloft, heleapt twelve ells across Markfleet, and glided on tosmite Thrain his death-blow on the slippery ice ? where for Bergthora's love and tenderness for her husband, she who was given young to Njal, and could not</p>
<p>find it in her heart to part from him when the houseblazed over their heads? where for Kari’s dash andgallantry, the man who dealt his blows straightforward, even in the Earl’s hall, and never thought twice aboutthem? where for Njal himself, the man who never dippedhis hands in blood, who could unravel all the knottypoints of the law; who foresaw all that was coming, whether for good or ill, for friend or for foe; who knewwhat his own end would be, though quite powerless toavert it; and when it came, laid him down to his rest, and never uttered sound or groan, though the flamesroared loud around him? Nor are the minor charactersless carefully drawn, the scolding tongue of Thrain’s firstwife, the mischief-making Thiostolf with his pole-axe, which divorced Hallgerda’s first husbands, Hrut’s swordmanship, Asgrim’s dignity, Gizur’s good counsel, Snorri’scommon sense and shrewdness, Gudmund’s grandeur, Thorgeir’s thirst for fame, Kettle’s kindliness, Ingialld’sheartiness, and, though last not least, Bjorn’s boastfulness, which his gudewife is ever ready to cry down—are allsketched with a few sharp strokes which leave their markfor once and for ever on the reader’s mind. Strange! wereit not that human nature is herself in every age, that suchforbearance and forgiveness as is shown by Njal and Hauskuld and Hall, should have shot up out of that social</p>
<p>soil, so stained and steeped with the blood-shedding ofrevenge. Revenge was the great duty of Icelandic life, yet Njal is always ready to make up a quarrel, thoughhe acknowledges the duty, when he refuses in his lastmoments to outlive his children, whom he feels himself unable to revenge. The last words of Hauskuld, when he was foully assassinated through the tale-bearingof Mord, were, “God help me and forgive you;” nordid the beauty of a Christian spirit ever shine out morebrightly than in Hall, who, when his son Ljot, theflower of his flock, fell full of youth, and strength, andpromise, in chancemedley at the battle on the Thingfield, at once for the sake of peace gave up the father’s and thefreeman’s dearest rights, those of compensation and revenge, and allowed his son to fall unatoned in order thatpeace might be made. This struggle between the principle of an old system now turned to evil, and that of anew state of things which was still fresh and good, between heathendom as it sinks into superstition, and Christianity before it has had time to become superstitious, stands strongly forth in the latter part of the Saga ; but as yet the new faith can only assert its forbearanceand forgiveness in principle. It has not had time, except in some rare instances, to bring them into play indaily life. Even in heathen times such a deed as that</p>
<p>BRIAN’S BATTLE. clxxxix</p>
<p>by which Njal met his death, to hem a man in withinhis house and then to burn it and him together, to chokea freeman, as Skarphedinn says, like a fox in his earth, was quite against the free and open nature of the race ; and though instances of such foul deeds occur besidesthose two great cases of Blundkettle and Njal, still theywere always looked upon as atrocious crimes and punishedaccordingly. No wonder, therefore, then that Flosi, afterthe Change of Faith, when he makes up his mind tofire Njal’s house, declares the deed to be one for whichthey would have to answer heavily before God, “ seeingthat we are Christian men ourselves.” But it is at Clontarf, in Brian’s battle, that the oldand new faith met in the lists, face to face, for their laststruggle. King Sigtrygg and his mother Kormlada, thewoman who had all good gifts only to make every baduse of them, may or may not have been Christians, buttheir Christianity, if they confessed that faith, did notshrink from summoning to their aid against the good King Brian, the champion of Christianity, Brodir the Viking,* the apostate deacon, and the most stubbornheathen of his time. Earl Sigurd of Orkney was a</p>
<p>Christian in name, but we know from the account of hisconversion, which is to be found in the Orkney Saga, how he only yielded to the preaching of King Olaf Tryggvi’s son, when that zealous missionary monarchhad him entirely in his power, and at last threatenedto hew off his son’s head before his eyes over the bulwarks of his ship. That Earl Sigurd was still a heathenat heart when he fared on the armada against King Brian, is clear from the fact, that he still had borne inthe front of his battle array his famous raven banner, wrought by his mother with mighty spells, which was tobring victory to the host before whom it fluttered, butdeath to the man by whose hands it was borne.* Along</p>
<p>en Stammes I. 558, note, who hazards a conjecture that Brodirmay be the Danish sea-king Gutring (Guðormr ?), mentionedby Thietmar of Merseburg, who died in 1018, as having beenordained a deacon, but who afterwards relapsed to heathendom.</p>
<p>BRIAN'S BATTLE. cxci</p>
<p>with the great Orkney Earl came a great gathering ofhis chiefs and followers, called to the war from everyisland on the Scottish Main from Unst to Arran, beatenblades who had followed the descendant of Thorfinn theskull-splitter, in many a roving cruise,—half heathenhalf Christian men, who trusted perhaps to the sign ofthe cross on land, and to Thor's holy hammer on shipboard,—scarce knowing to what creed they belonged, but well knowing that it was the duty of a brave warriorand faithful henchman to follow his liege lord wheneverhe launched his galleys for a Viking voyage. Alongwith these island levies came, as we know, many Icelanders of the best blood in the land. Flosi wouldhave gone himself, but the Earl would have none of hiscompany, as he had his pilgrimage to Rome to fulfil, butfifteen of the Burners went to the fray, and Thorstein Hall of the Side's son, and Halldor, the son of Gudmund the powerful, and many other northern champions</p>
<p>who bears it.' The banner was made with mickle handcunningand famous skill. It was made in raven's shape, and when the windblew out the banner, then it was as though the raven flapped hiswings for flight.&quot; For Earl Sigurd's nominal conversion to Christianity, see ch. 12, vol. i. p. 31 foll. of the new edition of the Orkney Saga. For Ragnar Hairybreeks' standard of the like kind, see Asser, Gesta Aelfredi, p. 481. Comp. Maurer Die Bekehrung des</p>
<p>of lesser note. On the side of King Brian* was arrayedthe whole chivalry of Ireland, except those partswhich owned the sway of Scandinavian conquerors. As leaders of that host came the aged King himself, the</p>
<p>BRIAN’S BATTLE. cxciii</p>
<p>kindest hearted and most just of men, and his sons, ownor adopted, Wolf the quarrelsome, and Kerthialfad,* andhis new Christian convert Ospak Brodir’s brother, who</p>
<p>O'Brien in his Dictionary thinks, from Borumha, a town close to Kincora—consisted of 300 cows with brass yokes ; 300 steeds ; 300 gold-hilted swords ; and 300 purple cloaks, which were paid by thepeople of Leinster as a fine for having sided with the Northmen. He is also said to have forced the Northmen in Limerick to pay him 365 pipes of red wine, and those in Dublin 150 pipes. Out of Kincora, or Cean Corradh, as it is written in the Irish Annals, the Icelandic Saga writer has made in one MS. Kantaraborg, for Kankaraborg, and thus confounded Kincora with the English Canterbury, atown better known to Northmen. Another MS., which has beenfollowed in our translation, reads Kunjattaborg, Connaught, but Brian ruled in Munster. See, for the life of Brian, “The Annals of Ireland ;” Dublin, 1846, pp. 147-8, 220, 508-16, a work which contains a vast amount of information on ancient Ireland, collectedfrom the Annals of the Four Masters, the Annals of Innisfail, andother sources. For the mistakes in the Icelandic MSS., see Munch Det Norske Folks Historie, ii. 644, who has gone through the Irishand Northern authorities for the Battle of Clontarf with great care. The account in our Saga was probably drawn from the accountsbrought home by Thorstein Hall of the Side’s son, who, as Munchwell remarks, was uncle of Oddi Kol’s son, who again, was thegreat authority of Ari the learned as to the history of the North. It was a family in which such stories as that of Brian’s Battle werenot likely to die out. Comp. Munch N. H., ii., 648.</p>
<p>had quitted the impious rites of his heathen faith, andhastened to warn the venerable monarch of his dangeron the very eve of the invasion. Nor were signs andportents wanting, before and after that bloody fight, tomark that more was at stake than the mere ascendancyof this or that line of kings. Clouds of the sky shedboiling blood, and birds of the air flocked to strangeconflicts as the awful day approached; swords flew fromtheir scabbards, and spears poised themselves in air, wielded by no earthly hands against the Viking band. King Sigtrygg's stronghold was the fort at Dublin, nearthe bridge, and thither by Palm Sunday the wholeheathen host had met; but Brian, warned in time by Ospak, was not only ready to meet them should theyfall upon him, but ready to march against and fall uponthem. He too, on Palm Sunday, had gathered the Christian host in his leaguer at Clontarf, and so the twoarmies lay watching one another through Passion Week. Brodir, skilled in sorcery, betook himself to his blackarts, and from the first got little comfort either forhimself or his brothers in arms. If the battle werefought before Good Friday the heathen host wouldbe utterly routed and lose its chiefs, but if thestruggle were delayed till Good Friday, then King Brian would fall, but still win the day. On Good</p>
<p>Friday, then, which fell in 1014 on the 18th of April, the heathen made up their minds to fight; and thatnothing might be wanting to stamp the struggle withthe seal of the ancient faith, Odin himself, as the legenddarkly hints, rode up, as we are told in many likestories, on an apple-gray horse, holding a halbertin his hand, and held a council of war with Kormlada, King Sigtrygg, and the other chiefs. One of the lastappearances of the God of Battles struggling with thefate which now at last had overtaken him, and helpinghis own on the very eve of battle with his comfort andadvice.* Nor were other tokens wanting. In Icelanditself, at Swinefell, where Flosi and the Burners had solong stayed, blood burst out on the Priest’s vestmentson Good Friday, and at Thvattwater, Hall’s abode, onthe same day, the Priest saw an abyss open hard bythe altar as he sang mass, in which were strangeand awful things. The northern mind plainly longlooked on Brian’s battle as a blow that went home</p>
<p>to the heart of many a household. In Caithness, and in other parts of the west, the Valkyries, Odin’scorse-choosing maidens, were seen, twelve of them ridingtogether, dismounting, entering a bower, setting up theirmystic loom, and there weaving out of the entrails ofmen, with swords for their shuttles, that grim Woof of War,* which is at once one of the last, as it is one of thegrandest flights of the Scandinavian Swan-maiden, ereshe wings her way for ever from the world, together withthe faith to which she and that wild strain of melodybelonged. The fight itself, and its issue, may be bestread in the pages of our Saga, but we may note thatthe struggle of the two faiths is carried on throughout the day, until at last the champions of neithercreed can claim a complete victory. The song of the Valkyries themselves, as well as the way in which theytear the weird woof asunder, and hasten half of themone way and half another, show that though their leaning was all for the young King Sigtrygg “of the silkenbeard,” and though, according to the old faith, victorywas foredoomed for him, yet that now, when struggling</p>
<p>BRIAN’S BATTLE. cxcvii</p>
<p>with a new and better belief, their spells and soothsaying were powerless to win the day, and could onlyavail to make the battle drawn. Thus it is that Brodir, that stout champion on whose mail no sword wouldbite, is overthrown at the thrust of Kerthialfad’s Christian spear; and felled, not once but thrice, loses allfaith in his heathen harness, and flies like a felon tothe wood, only to issue from it twice a felon, to take thelife of the Christian king. Here, in its turn, heathensorcery had spoken the truth, for Brian fell, but fellonly after the victory was won. So too, with Sigurd’sraven banner, one half, and the greater half, of its charmwas broken, when it advanced against the array ofwarriors who trusted in a purer faith; it did not winthe day for the host before whom it was borne, but thelesser half of its mystic nature asserted its sway, forit was the death of every man who bore it on thatblood-stained field, until the turn came to the Earl himself, and he fell, thrust through with a spear, havingwound the banner round his body. Almost ludicrousare the words of Rafn the red, who, though a Christian, had joined Earl Sigurd’s host, but more wise thanothers of his followers, had refused to bear the Earl’sdevil, as he called his banner, bidding him bear it himself. We are told that this Rafn, as he fled from the</p>
<p>field, being in danger of drowning, and fancying he sawthe fiends about to drag him down to the depths below, invoked St. Peter's aid, and made a vow that he, the Apostle's dog, would run a third time to Rome on apilgrimage, if the saint would help him out of thisstrait. So strangely did the bright day-beams of therising sun of Christianity shine through the dark cloudswhich overspread the heathen night, when every instantthe victory of the new faith became more certain ; butat the moment of which we write, the struggle betweenlight and darkness was still raging throughout the North, just as it raged with doubtful issue on thatmemorable Good Friday throughout the great Battle of Clontarf. The age of miracles was then long past, and Providence then as now submitted to the trammelsof time and space, and having both time enough andspace enough, did everything surely, but nothing in ahurry ; the Christian reader, therefore, must neither besurprised nor shocked to learn, as he will most assuredlylearn if he reads this Saga aright, that the pure doctrines of Christianity were then merely the possessionof a few, while the creed of the common herd was littlemore than a garbled blending of the most jarring tenetsand wildest superstitions of both faiths. One word and we must bring this introduction to</p>
<p>an end ; it is merely to point out how calmly and peacefully the Saga ends, with the perfect reconciliation of Kari and Flosi, those generous foes, who throughoutthe bitter struggle in which they were engaged alwaystreated each other with respect. It is a comfort to find, after the whole fitful story has been worked out, afterpassing from page to page, every one of which reekswith gore, to find that after all there were even inthat bloodthirsty Iceland of the tenth century suchthings as peaceful old age and happy firesides, and thatmen like Flosi and Kari, who had both shed so muchblood, one in a good and the other in a wicked cause, should after all die, Flosi on a trading voyage, an Icelandic Ulysses, in an unseaworthy ship, good enough, as he said, for an old and death-doomed man, Kari athome, well stricken in years, blest with a famous andnumerous offspring, and a proud but loving wife.</p>
<h3>Notes</h3>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-1">Njála, the teller of which only handled the history of the Dales- men so far as he needed it for his story, passes quickly over the quarrels of the half-brothers. We know from Laxdæla that they had many differences, and those of a far more prosaic and every- day kind than this soothsaying of Hrut. In the same way, in order</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-2">Mord, though he died soon after, and though he is called by his daughter “an old man,” could not have been much more than sixty at the time. This is clear, both from the date of Sighvat’s coming to Iceland, as well as from the fact that it would have been thought disgraceful in Hrut to challenge a man worn out with years to fight. At sixty in those days, a man was thought to be still hale and hearty, and fit for anything.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-3">The slaying of Swart, 975; the slaying of Kol, 976; the slaying of Atli, 977; the slaying of Brynjolf the unruly, 978; and the slay- ing of Sigmund the white and Skjold, 979.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-4">The custom of the Sagateller, to clear the way by telling as much as possible about a family when one member is mentioned, is likely to mislead the reader as to the age of Njal's sons. Thus, after he has mentioned Njal and his children, told their names and described their aspect with a minuteness from which it would be possible to paint the very men, he goes on to tell us whom they married, and gets rid of that interesting subject with regard to all of them at once. It is, however, plain, that they were not married till long after, and that they were not grown men till about the time of Sigmund's slaying in 979. Guðbrandr Vigfússon thinks that the eldest of them, and he thinks Helgi was the eldest, was not much more than twenty at that time. If the Thorhalla, Asgrim Ellidagrim's son's daughter, mentioned at the quarrel between Hallgerda and Bergthora, was really Helgi's wife, and not Thorkatla, her mother, Asgrim's wife, Helgi must not only have been the eldest, but must have been married very young. There seems to have been some doubt about the matter, for the Saga sometimes calls Helgi's wife Thorhalla and sometimes Thorkatla.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-5">Literally the &quot;Ogre of war.&quot;</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-6">He was the son of Lambi, another of Fiddle Mord's brothers. Sigmund had other brothers, who throughout the story throw in their lot with the sons of Sigfus their first cousins.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-7">Neither Hauskuld Dale-Kolli's son, nor any of the chiefs of the Dales in the West are mentioned in 785 at the Althing, when Gunnar stood in great need of their help. The year before both Hauskuld and Hrut were there. The year after, 786, Olof the peacock, Hauskuld's showy son, invited from the Hill of Laws all the great men of the land to his famous arvel feast, as it would still be called in the north of England; that is, to the feast which all heirs gave on succession, and at which they drank themselves into their father's estate. Mord Valgard's son gives such a feast in our Saga on the death of his father Valgard the guileful, see ch. 107, vol. ii., p. 103. Gunnar no doubt was asked by his brother-in-law to ride west, but if he was there, the feast must have taken place rather earlier in the summer than the time mentioned in Laxdæla, &quot;when the summer would be still alive ten weeks,&quot; that is, when there were still ten summer weeks left; for in that year Gunnar was at a feast at Tongue, when there were eight weeks left of summer, and the fight at Knafahills took place on his return home.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-8">Some difficulty occurs, however, with regard to the history of Mord Valgard's son,—the wicked son of a wicked sire,—the greatest villain, perhaps, in all Icelandic story, and one who, throughout our Saga, is the very counterpart of Loki in the mythology of the race. We know that Valgard the guileful only married Unna about 971. Mord was born in 972 at earliest. He was therefore not twelve years old when he gave his crafty counsel to Otkel about the cheese. If so, he was a very forward lad. We must add, however, that there are many instances in the Sagas of such forwardness; that twelve years was the time fixed for majority by the Icelandic law, and that at fourteen years of age a lad might betroth himself. We hear so little of Valgard the guileful, who seems to have spent most of his life abroad, that one is almost tempted to fancy that the Saga has attributed some of the father's crafty counsel to his son. Mord's marriage with Thorkatla, Gizur the white's daughter, the only being whom he seemed to have loved except himself, took place in 986, as soon as ever he had attained the legal age. After all, therefore, it may only be the difficulty which we should have in believing such a story nowadays which makes us less inclined to believe events which may have been perfectly natural in another age, and another state of society.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-9">“Dipwater,” “Washwater,” so called probably from the immer- sion of the Icelanders in the stream when they were baptized.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-10">See the account of Snorri's famous speech in the Kristni Saga (Biskupa Sögur, I. p. 22, Kaupmannahöfn, 1858). &quot;Then came a man running and said that a stream of lava (earthfire, jarðeldr) had burst out at Ölfus, and would run over the homestead of Thorod the priest. Then the heathen men began to say, 'No wonder that the</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-11">See the account of his coming to Njal in the Saga. It was clearly a made-up matter between Njal and Kettle that the boy should pass from his mother's house to the Mark, and thence to Bergthorsknoll.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-12">The byre, which always stood near to the house, was called fjós, and from this there was sometimes, as we see from Gisli Sur's son's Saga and Droplaugarsona Saga, an entrance into the skáli.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-13">See Gisli Súr's son's Saga, Copenhagen, 1849, p. 88, where the skáli or hall, answering to the sitting-room; and the stokkabúr, a storehouse built of logs, were clearly separate buildings.  This was in Norway, but the houses in Iceland and the houses in Norway were built on the same plan, except that the walls in Iceland were stone or turf, while in Norway, wood was the material used.  See also in Njála, ch. 48, vol. i. p. 163, where Otkel says the cause of the fire which burnt down his storehouse, útibúr, was that it stood next to</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-14">Some of these buildings were a hundred ells or more long, such as Gísli’s eldhús at Hól, which was a hundred ells long, and Bjarni Skeggbroddi’s son’s eldhús at Crosswick in the East, which was thirty-five fathoms long, fourteen ells high, and fourteen ells wide. From the size of his hall he was called Bjarni longhouse.—Land- náma, pp. 324, Kph., 1843. It must be remembered that as the Sagas were not written down till the middle of the twelfth and the thirteenth centuries, the writers often apply the terms for houses used in their time to buildings of earlier date. In the twelfth century men began to live more comfortably, and broke up their large halls into separate compartments. Thus a portion of the skáli at the upper end, where the pall or dais was, was shut off, and called stofa. Thus, Sturlúnga Saga, 5, 3, in the house at Sauðafell, mention is made of going “out of the skáli and into the stofa,” where Solveiga, who had just had a child, slept with her mother, while the rest of the household slept in the skáli. So, also, in the same Saga, 5, 27, at Micklabæ, mention is made of an almanna- stofa, a common hall or skáli, and a little stofa or parlour. An in- stance of the confusion caused by a twelfth century scribe writ- ing about the tenth century, occurs in our Saga, where, ch. 115, vol. ii. p. 121, it is said that Flosi went into the stofa or sitting-</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-15">Between the rows of Pillars and Posts which supported the centre and side In the Passages between the Pillars were Sleeping Places for the Household. The Sigurðr Guðmundsson del.t Reykjavik Edmonston &amp; Doug</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-16">Also called brandadyrr, postdoor, or pillardoor, from the side- posts which distinguished it from the women’s door, and which may be seen in the plan.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-17">It has been thought by some that the lokrekkja, pl. lokrekkjur, was merely a press bed; but that it clearly was an enclosed space, a bed-room, in fact, with a door opening into it through the wain- scot, is plain, not only from several passages in Njála, but also from the following striking account in Gísli Súr's son's Saga. Gísli's fos- ter brother had been slain by murder, lönvig, and he, Gísli, pro- ceeds to take vengeance in the same way. &quot;Now Gísli goes inside along the hall and up to their shut bed, inside which Thorgrim and Thordísa, Gísli's sister, slept, and the door of the shut bed was ajar. Then Gísli goes up into the shut bed and feels about him; he laid his hand on Thordísa's breast, for she slept on the outside&quot;—(nærr stokki; comp. Sturl. I., 207, c., hvárt vilt þú hvíla vid stokk eða þili. wilt thou sleep on the outside of the bed, i.e., nearest the rail, or on the inside, i.e., against the wainscot, showing that the bedstead was pushed close up to the wainscot at the back of the bedroom).— &quot;Thordísa spoke and said—' Why was thy hand so cold, Thorgrim?' for she thought that he had laid it over her. Then Gísli warms his hand in his shirt, and stands still meanwhile on the floor of the bed-room (í hvílugólfinu), and now he lays his hand upon Thorgrim's</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-18">In Fagrskinna, Christ. 1847, pp. 149, 150 (Olafs saga kyrrat), we read the following :—“Þat var forneskju siðr í Noregi ok í Danmörku ok svá í Svíaveldi, þar sem váru konúngsbúi ok veiz- lustofur, váru dyrr á báðum endum stofunnar, en konúngs hásæti var á miðjum lángbekk þann, er vissi móti sólu; sat þar drottning á vinstri hönd konúngi, ok var þat þá kallat öndvegi, ok sá sess vegligastr hvárntveggja veg út ífrá til karla ok kvenna, er næst var öndvegi, en sá úvegligastr er næst var durum. Hinn</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-19">Cfr Formmanna Sögur vi. and Heimskringla.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-20">Earl Sigurd’s hall in the Orkneys was arranged in the good old fashion. See our Saga, ch. 153, vol. ii. pp. 324, where the Earl puts</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-21">See Laxdæla, ch. xxix. p. 114, where famous stories are said to have been carved on the wood of the wainscot (á þilividi- num), and on the timbers of the roof, and “that carved work was so well wrought, that the hall was thought much more grand when the hangings were down than when they were up.” This shews that Olaf the peacock’s carvings must have come lower down the wainscot than those shewn in our sketch; but this was, of course, a mere matter of taste. For the value set on hangings, see, amongst other passages, that in Gísli Súr’s son’s Saga. Pp. 111, 112. Kaupmh.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-22">See the pretty story, which, though long, is worth telling. Gísli Súr’s son’s Saga. Pp. 96, 97. Kaupmh. 1849. “Thorkell Súr’s son was a great man for show, and a very lazy fellow, and did little or nothing in the way of work for their household, but Gísli worked day and night. Once there was a good drying day, and so Gísli set all the men hard at work haymaking, save his brother Thorkell. He was the only one of the men at home, and had gone and laid him down in the hall after breakfast to sleep. Outside, and on the southside away from the hall, stood the bower of the two sisters-in-law, Auð and Asgerda, and there they sat and sewed. So Thorkell went thither and lay down in the sun, by the bower. Then Asgerda began to speak. ‘Do help me Auð,’ she says, ‘and cut out a shirt for my husband Thorkell.’ ‘I can’t do that better than thou,’ said Auð, ‘nor wouldst thou beg me to do so, if it were for my brother Vestein.’ ‘Ah,’ says Asgerda, ‘as to Vestein, that’s quite another thing, and so I sometimes think, and indeed I love him more than Thorkell my husband, though we shall never come together.’ ‘I have known for a long time,’ said Auð, ‘what Thorkell thought about that, and how it all came about, so let us not speak any more of it!’ ‘Why,’ says Asgerda, ‘I look upon it as no harm, though I think Vestein a good fellow; besides I have heard it said that thou and Thorgrim’ (a next door neigh- bour), ‘often had meetings before thou wert given away in marriage.’ ‘Very true,’ said Auð, ‘but no harm came of it to any one, and I never set my heart on any other man than Gísli, so that any dis- honour followed; and now,’ says Auð, ‘let us cease this talk.’ So they stopped talking; but Thorkell had heard every word they said, and now he began to speak—‘Hearken now to a great won- der! listen to a big lie! hear now what I say, this shall be one man’s death or more;’ and with that he goes off. Then Auð began</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-23">Whatever may be the doubt that now exists as to whether grain—that is, either rye or oats—will grow in Iceland, there can be no question at all that in early times corn did grow in many parts of the island. Below the homestead at Lithend lay &quot;Acretongue,&quot;— that is the tongue or spit of arable land which an arm of Markfleet has now nearly torn away; but in Gunnar's time it was this piece of land which was white to harvest, that made him turn back from his banishment. In his corn field, too, Gunnar is busy sowing when Otkell rides over him; and Hauskuld the Whiteness priest is slain in the gray spring morning by his assassins while hard at the same work. But it is needless to heap quotation on quotation to support what must be well known to every reader of the Sagas.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-24">Perhaps the most instructive of all the cases of hayneed was that of Blundkettle, in Hænsa Þórir's Saga (Íslend. Sög. ii., p. 131, and foll. Copenhagen, 1847), where the whole question, as well as the means taken to avert it by slaughtering as many of the horses and cattle in the autumn as would save the lives of the rest during the winter, are fully described. Here, too, like Gunnar, Blundkettle has to deal with a rich churl, Hænsa Þórir, Chicken-Thorir, but, unlike Gunnar, Blundkettle takes the hay, and leaves the price in its stead. Hence a feud arises, in the course of which Blundkettle is</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-25">See Finn Magnusen's Treatise Om de Gamle Skandinavers Inddeling af Dagens Tider. Kjöbenhavn, 1844, p. 38, foll ; a work of very grea interest and research. Compare also Ljósvetnínga Saga, ch. viii.; Ísfirðinga Saga, pp. 38-52; Heiðarvíga Saga (Ís- lend. Sög. i.), pp. 273, 283, 288; and Sturlúnga Saga, i., p. 78.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-26">It may be as well to mention here that the loom used by the Icelanders in the twelfth century and which is still used, we believe, in Iceland at the present day, as well as in Shetland, and in some other parts of the north, was a fixed upstanding loom, in the upper part of which was a roller, round which the woof, as fast as it was woven, was wound up and withdrawn from the loom. It was on such a loom that Daurrud saw the Valkyries or Corse-choosing maidens at work in Caithness before Brian's battle, while they sung that grim song &quot;The Woof of War.&quot; This explains the words &quot;Wind we, wind swiftly, our war-winning woof.&quot; As fast as the weird woof was woven it was wound round the roller and withdrawn. Comp. Olavius (Olafsen), &quot;Reise igjennem Island,&quot; Kph. 1780, ii. 630, where a description and plate of the old Icelandic loom will be found.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-27">“ Hón (Þórhildr) gekk at beina ok Bergþóra Skarphéðinsdóttir kona Njáls.”</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-28">The ale was very new; it was brewed just before the feasts at which it was to be drunk. Comp. Orkney Saga, new ed., ch. 34, vol. i. p. 113, transl. :—“ Earl Rognvald sat in Kirkwall, and drew thither all the stores which he needed to have for his winter quarters. He had, too, there a great band of men and much good cheer. But a little before Yule Earl Rognvald fared with a great following into the Little Papey to fetch malt to be brewed for Yule.”</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-29">Humboldt, for instance, in his Kosmos.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-30">Kari’s ships were thus distinguished when he came to the rescue of Njal’s sons, in Scotland’s Firths.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-31">See our Saga, ch. vi., vol. i., p. 21, where Hrut sets off in the spring to the West Firths, to get in the money for which he had sold the wares which he had brought with him from Norway the summer before.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-32">Maurer Isländische Sagen, Leipzig, 1860, 220-1. The reason given by modern tradition for this choice of a burying place, was, that she might be near the Bishop, a fact which shows how tradi- tions grow, for the Bishop’s residence was not removed to Laugar- ness till a very recent date.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-33">“ At veita nábjargir.”</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-34">See the very curious account of the binding on the “ hell- shoes” in Gísli Súr’s son’s Saga. Kph. 1849, p. 23. “ Gísli,” after his brother-in-law Vestein had been slain in his house, “ makes ready with all his men to lay Vestein in a cairn on that sandhill under which Sedgetarn also lies, below the house at Sæbol. And when Gísli had set out on his way, then Thorgrim” —who had secretly slain Vestein—“ came with many men to the cairn-making. But when they had laid Vestein in the cairn, as was the custom, Thorgrim went up to Gísli and said, ‘ It is right and customary,’ says he, ‘ to bind hellshoon on men, which they shall walk in to Valhalla, and I will do that for Vestein.’ And when he had done that, then he said, ‘ I cannot bind on hell- shoon at all if these loosen.’” So also, in the later version of the Saga (p. 107), “ And when they had made the cairn, Thorgrim the priest goes up to Gísli and said, ‘ Now it is a custom,</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-35">Those who failed to attend were liable to a fine, þingfarar- kaup, which went to the priest. He had also other dues, as temple rate or toll (hoftollr), fines from the goods of outlaws, tolls from foreigu ships, succession dues and fines on the death or manslaugh- ter of strangers who died without heirs in Iceland, and finally (sau- ðakvöð), certain dues in the way of sheep from the freemen of the district. But, on the other hand, the office of the goði, even sup- posing him to have drawn upon all these sources of income at once, was one that required considerable outlay. The temple was kept in repair at his cost, he supplied the victims for sacrifices, and prepared the feast in a worthy manner. This duty, in heathen times, before the Althing was established, and the þingfararkaup became a source of revenue, must have swallowed up most of the temple tolls. When the Althing came, the Thingmen of the goði rode thither and were maintained during their stay there in his booths and at his ex- pense. In this way the fines for non-attendance must have been more than consumed. Well therefore might the old Christian law of Iceland say—&quot; When a man has a priesthood, this is not to be reckoned as liable to tithe. It is power but not property.&quot;</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-36">See the origin of the name in Landnáma, V. 12, ed. 1843. Kettlebjörn the old, while looking about for a lot that suited him, came up from Ellidaros, near Reykjavik, to search the land. The first night he stopped at Skalabrekka. “But when they went thence they came to that stream which they called Axewater (Üxará), there they lost their axe; they stayed sometime under a fell-mull (that is, a bluff jutting out from the fell), which they called Reyðarmull (troutmull or charmull, the fish being so called from its bright red colour), and there they set their hearts upon the trout that they caught in the stream.” If so, Kettlebjörn must have passed over the Thing- field, and passed on towards Reyðarmull and Reyðwater before he fell upon a lot that suited him in Laugardale and the Tongues.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-37">Grágás Greygoose, the venerable code of laws by which Ice- land was governed in the time of the Commonwealth. The origin of the name seems doubtful. It came perhaps from the grey goose skin with which the Book of the Law was covered.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-38">That the bridge was some little way down the stream is plain, from Njála, ch. 144, vol. ii., p. 274, where Hall of the Side, and Ljot, when driven out of the battle, which began near the Hill of Laws, turn down east of Axewater. There Ljot waits at the foot</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-39">Virki “ work,” “ fortified place,” where the word is used in the sense in which it still is often heard in the last syllable of “ earthwork.”</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-40">Hólmgang, pl. hólmgöngur, from “hólm” an island or holm, and “ganga” to go; islands were chosen because the laws of the duello in those days required that neither combatant should step without a given space. For the Code of Honour in Iceland see Kormak’s Saga, ch. x. p. 86-8, where the whole law of duelling is laid down in the most punctilious way. Comp. also Gísli Súr’s son’s Saga, I. p. 6, and Egil’s Saga, chap. lxvii. p. 159, ed. Rey- kjavík, 1856.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-41">The following description of the arrangement of the booths on the Althing was written in the year 1700, and printed in the Ice- landic Periodical Thjódólfr of May 2d, 1851 :— “ Flosi’s booth on the Althing was farthest to the north on the west side under the waterfall, but was nearly all broken down in 1700 ; but where the Court of Laws sat in 1700, was the booth of Thorgeir the Priest of Lightwater, who was the Speaker who brought Christianity into the law. The cleft of the cross, the height of which was that of King Olaf Tryggvi’s son, that cleft is next on the north to</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-42">When Njal, ch. 69, vol. i., p. 222, says, “That is no breach of settlement that any man should take the law against another, for with law shall our land be built up and settled, and with lawless- ness wasted and spoiled,” he no doubt appeals to the good sense of the community, and points out the blessings derived from the substitution of judicial trials instead of wager of battle.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-43">Vættvangsbúar. The “vættvangr,” or legal “spot,” is laid down in Greygoose, II. 19, A. to extend a bowshot every way from the spot where the first assault was made.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-44">In cases of homicide no summoning of the manslayer was needed. He was bound to confess the deed as soon as it was com- mitted, under pain of being held guilty of murder. In civil suits, or in those for petty crimes, as in Unna's suit against Hrut for her portion, or in that for Hallgerda's theft, the plaintiff had to summon the defendant at his own abode, a service often of no small danger.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-45">The Icelandic year was divided into two parts, summer and winter, each consisting of twenty-six weeks; the first summer day was the Thursday which fell between the 9th and 15th of April, old style.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-46">This was called at spyrja at þingfesti ok heimilisfangi.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-47">Ut fara is the term used; it implies that the courts proceeded from the Hill of Laws, or the Court of Laws, as a common centre.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-48">This was called at reifa málit, and the foreman was called reifingarmaðr. There were two of these foremen, one for the</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-49">Maurer, Isl. Staatsverfass. p. 186, agrees with the Glossary to the 4to edition of Grágás, in thinking that the word comes from the negative prefix &quot; ve&quot; and &quot; fang,&quot; business, as though nothing further could be done in the suit. Cleasby's Dict., sub voce, on the other hand, derives it from &quot; vè,&quot; halidom, and &quot; fang&quot; from &quot; fengja,&quot; to lay hold, as though the judges, on dividing, laid hold of the hallowed ring, and made oath as to the step which they were about to take.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-50">It is curious to remark how the old right of battle underlies the whole system of the Law in heathen times. It seems to have</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-51">This was called &quot; at handselia sök,&quot; or &quot; at handselia vörn ;&quot; sometimes, as in Njála, p. 217, orig., or vol. ii. p. 210, transl., the expression &quot; selia á hendr&quot; is used.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-52">Þings afglöpun. In this way Eyjolf and Flosi are both sum- moned to the Fifth Court in our Saga, vol. ii. ch. 143, p. 261, first for bribery, and secondly for having brought false and irrelevant witness before the Court. The irrelevancy and chicanery consisted in the following points. In the first place, Flosi had no right to change his Quarter without leave had from the Court of Laws; secondly, public notice ought to have been given of the change of priesthood ; and thirdly, the competency of the Court depended on the state of things at the time when the suit was set on foot, and therefore a change of priesthood at a later date was irrelevant, so far as that suit was concerned.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-53">Fjörbaug, literally “lifering,” or fine; fjörbaugsmaðr, a man who had satisfied the law by paying such a fine to the priest; fjorbaugsgarðr, an enclosed space near a court, a “verge” or “liberty” within which a “fjörbaugsmaðr” was safe; which word, as it seems from several passages in Grágás and the Sagas, is also used for the lesser outlawry itself.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-54">The sole right of exemption from this public burden allowed by the law, was the plea that the shipmaster had already undertaken to give other outlaws a passage.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-55">In other words, Sam only made Hrafnkell “héraðssekr,” instead of taking his life as a “skógmaðr.”</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-56">“ Hafði hann þat í hug sèr at leiða smánönnum at sækja mál á hendr hánum ; ætlaði hann at hleypa upp dóminum fyrir Sámi ok hrekja hann af málinu.” Hrafnkel’s Saga Freysgoða</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-57">“At veita grið ok trygðir;” the formulary itself was called “griðamál” or “trygðamál,” and he who uttered it was said “at mæla fyrir griðum.”</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-58">Heiðarvíga Saga (Ísland. Sög. ii.), p. 379 foll.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-59">In this sketch of an Icelandic trial, and for the law in general, Arnesens Islandske Rættergang, Kbh. 1762, has been fol- lowed. But as much has been made clearer since Arnesens' day, his statements have been corrected and checked by Maurer's invaluable treatise, Die Entstehung des Isländischen Staats und seiner Verfassung, München, 1852. Over the history of the Fim- tardóm or Fifth Court, in particular, Maurer's genius and research have thrown an entirely new light. The only point which he seems not to have proved is the existence of the Lögmaðr as a regular official in each priesthood, and bearing in some respects a co-ordinate authority with the priests themselves. So far as Ice- land is concerned, the existence of such an official rests upon two passages, one in Hávarðar Saga Ísfirðings, ch. 1, p. 2. Kph. 1860. Comp. ch. 3, p. 8; the other in Svarfdæla Saga, ch. 10; in both of which it seems doubtful whether the term lögmaðr is not used rather of a man like Njál or Mord, skilled and learned in the law, to whom the neighbours betook themselves for advice, than tech- nically of one filling a fixed and recognized office. It may be</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-60">The following pretty story, translated by the writer, and published in the first number of “ Once a Week,” shows plainly the</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-61">The answer of Thorstein, Hall of the Side’s son, when Ker- thialfad asked him why he did not fly like the rest, but stopped to tie his shoe, was worthy of the best days of Sparta. “ Because I am at home in Iceland, and I cannot get home to-night.” food both for his bear and himself. So he went to a bailiff of the king, whose name was Auki, and begged him to get him some food, that he might feed himself and the bear, which he meant to give to King Sweyn. “ Auki answers : ‘ I will sell thee food, if thou wilt.’ “ ‘ I have nothing to give for it now,’ said Audun ; ‘ but I would be glad to hit upon some way of bringing the beast to the king, for it were great scathe if so precious a thing were to die on my hands.’ “ Auki said : ‘ Ye’ll both of you need much food before ye get to the king. And now I’ll make thee this offer : I will feed ye both till then, but then I must have half the beast; and what thou hast now to look at is this—that thou wilt not have even half of it if it starves to death on thy hands.’ “ Audun thought this choice hard, but still could see nothing better for it as things stood ; so they struck a bargain, and he agreed to sell Auki half the bear, on condition that they started for where the king was at once, and should reckon the worth on both sides, first of the food which Auki gave him, and then of the beast; and that Auki should pay Audun so much as was over, if the king thought half the bear worth more than the food. So they went both of them till they found King Sweyn. He greeted Auki, the bailiff, well, but asked the man who came with him who he was, for he did not know “ Audun answers : ‘ I am a man from Iceland, new come from</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-62">Trotternish and Vaternish in Skye, for instance.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-63">It is plain that Brodir’s real name is lost. He was Ospak’s brother, and the Irish Annalists made the noun of relationship into a proper name. Comp. Maurer, Bekehrung des Norwegisch-</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-64">See the Story in the Orkney Saga, new edition, ch. 11, vol. i. p. 29. The Scottish Earl Finnleik had challenged Earl Sigurd to meet him in a pitched battle by a certain day. Earl Sigurd went to seek counsel of his mother, who was a wise woman, and told her the odds against him would not be less than seven to one. “His mother said, ‘I had reared thee up long in my wool-bag had I known that thou wouldst like to live for ever, but know that fate rules life, and not the place whither a man goeth ; better is it to die with honour than to live with shame. Take thou here hold of this banner, which I have made with all my art, and I ween it will bring victory to those before whom it is borne, but speedy death to him</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-65">The good King Brian, afterwards known as Brian Boroimhe, or &quot;of the Tribute,&quot; succeeded his brother Mahon as King of Munster in 976. After his accession he waged constant wars with the Northmen who, in the two preceding centuries, had overrun and settled in many parts of Ireland, their chief strongholds being the seaports of Dublin, Wexford, Waterford, Limerick, and Cork. Being able to hold his own against these formidable foes, whom, as the Irish Annals say, he defeated in more than forty battles, Brian reduced the petty kings and chiefs of his own race, forcing them to pay tribute, and to give him hostages. At length, in 1002, being then himself seventy-six, he deposed the Overking of Ireland, Malachi the Second, of the race of Hy-Niall, a dynasty which had held that dignity really or nominally for 600 years, since the days of their great ancestor, Njal of the Nine Hostages, so called because in the course of his conquests he had taken hostages from nine nations. He is said to have made St. Patrick prisoner in Gaul when a lad, and to have sold him as a slave in Ireland, whence he escaped to return as the Apostle of Ireland. This Njal is interesting to us, as the first Njal of whom tradition tells; the name was a common Irish one, and still exists in Neal, Neill, and the other forms of the word. Our Njal got it from some unknown connexion of his family with Ireland, just as Kormak and Kjartan, and many other Ice- landers with Celtic names, got theirs. But to return to Brian,—hav- ing thus assumed the sovereignty of Ireland as Lord Paramount, Brian lived in great state and glory in his palace at Ceann Corradh, or Kincora, near Killaloe, in the county of Clare. The tribute from which he derived his title Boroimhe—unless he was so called, as</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-66">Munch, II. 646, supposes that this name is a distortion of the Celtic Tirdelvach ; and he further supposes that this was the Chris- tian name of the O'Kelly, king of Hy Maine, mentioned in the Annals of Innisfail as having been one of the leaders on Brian’s side.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-67">Munch, N. H. ii. 645, thinks that it was one of Brian’s dis- contented vassals who thus gave secret information to the foe, but the account given above is better suited to the mythical hue which is thrown over the battle in our Saga. The hour and the day, too, Thursday evening, the most witching time, according to northern belief, in all the week, speak for the supernatural character of the stranger.</p>
<p id="note-chronology-outline-68">In Icelandic, “Vef Darraðar”—the name of Daurrud, the man in Caithness who is said to have seen the weaving—clearly arose out of a misunderstanding as to the meaning of the old word “Darraðr,” which implies “war,” or “the goddess of war.” See Sveinbjörn Egilsson sub voce.</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">Icelandic Chronology</h2>
<p>A.D. 850. Birth of Harold fairhair. 860. Harold fairhair comes to the throne. 870. Harold fairhair sole King in Norway. 871. Ingolf sets out for Iceland. 872. Battle of Hafrsfirth (Hafrsfjörðr). 874. Ingolf and Leif go to settle in Iceland. 877. Kettle hæng goes to Iceland. 880-884. Harold fairhair roots out the Vikings in the west. 888. Fall of Thorstein the red in Scotland. 890-900. Rush of settlers from the British Isles to Iceland. 892. Aud the deeply wealthy comes to Iceland. 900-920. The third period of the Landnámstide. 920. Harold fairhair shares the kingdom with his sons. 923. Hrut Hauskuld's brother born. 929. Althing established. 930. Hrafn Kettle hæng's son Speaker of the Law. 930-935. Njal born. 930. The Fleetlithe feud begins. 933. Death of Harold fairhair. 940. End of the Fleetlithe feud ; Fiddle Mord a man ofrank ; Hamond Gunuar's son marries Mord'ssister Rannveiga. 941. Fall of King Eric Bloodaxe. c. 945. Gunnar of Lithend born. 955-60. Njal's sons born. 959. Glum marries Hallgerda. 960. Fall of King Hacon, Athelstane's foster-child Harold Grayfell, King in Norway.</p>
<p>963. Hrut goes abroad. 965. Hrut returns to Iceland, and marries Unna Mord'sdaughter. 968. Unna parts from Hrut. 969. Fiddle Mord and Hrut strive at the Althing. Fallof King Harold Grayfell. Earl Hacon rules in Norway. 970-71. Fiddle Mord's death ; Gunnar and Hrut strive atthe Althing. 972. Gunnar of Lithend goes abroad. 974. Gunnar returns to Iceland. 974. Gunnar's marriage with Hallgerda. 975. The slaying of Swart. 976. The slaying of Kol. 977. The slaying of Atli. 978. The slaying of Brynjolf the unruly, and Thord Freedmanson. 979. The slaying of Sigmund the white. 983. Hallgerda steals from Otkell at Kirkby. 984. The suit for the theft settled at the Althing. 985. Otkell rides over Gunnar in the spring ; fight at Rangriver just before the Althing ; at the Althing Geir the priest and Gunnar strive ; in theautumn Hauskuld Dale-Kolli's son, Gunnar'sfather-in-law, dies ; birth of Hauskuld Thrain's son. 986. The fight at Knafahills, and death of Hjort Gunnar's brother. 987. The suit for those slain at Knafahills settled at the Althing. 988. Gunnar goes west to visit Olaf the peacock. 989. Slaying of Thorgeir Otkell's son before, and banishment of Gunnar at, the Althing ; Njal's sons Helgi and Grim, and Thrain Sigfus' son, go abroad.</p>
<p>990. Gunnar slain at Lithend. 992. Thrain returns to Iceland with Hrapp; Njal's sonsill treated by Earl Hacon for his sake. 994. Njal's sons return to Iceland, bringing Kari with 995. Death of Earl Hacon; Olaf Tryggvi's son King of Norway. 996. Skarphedinn slays Thrain. 997. Thangbrand sent by King Olaf to preach Christianity in Iceland. 998. Slaying of Arnor of Forswaterwood by Flosi'sbrothers at Skaptarfells Thing (Njal, II. p. 123); Thangbrand's missionary journey; Gizur and Hjallti go abroad. 999. Hjallti Skeggi's son found guilty of blasphemyagainst the Gods at the Althing; Thangbrandreturns to Norway. 1000. Gizur and Hjallti return to Iceland ; the Change of Faith, and Christianity brought into the law atthe Althing on St. John's day, June 24th. Fallof King Olaf Tryggvi's son at Svoldr, Sept. 9th. 1001. Thorgeir the priest of Lightwater gives up the Speakership of the Law. 1002. Grim of Mossfell Speaker of the Law. 1003. Grim lays down the Speakership. 1003 or 1004. Skapti Thorod's son Speaker of the Law ; the Fifth Court established ; Hauskuld Thrain's sonmarries Hildigunna Flosi's niece, and has one ofthe new priesthoods at Whiteness. 1006. Duels abolished in legal matters ; slaying of Hauskuld Njal's son by Lyting and his brothers. 1009. Amund the blind slays Lyting ; Valgard the guileful comes back to Iceland ; his evil counsel to</p>
<p>Mord ; Mord begins to backbite and slander Hauskuld and Njal's sons to one another. 1011. Hauskuld the Whiteness priest slain early in thespring ; suit for his manslaughter at the Althing ; Njal's Burning the autumn after. 1012. The suit for the Burning, and battle at the Althing ; Flosi and the Burners banished ; Kariand Thorgeir Craggeir carry on the feud. 1013. Flosi goes abroad with the Burners, and Karifollows them ; Flosi and Kari in Orkney. 1014. Brian's battle on Good Friday, Flosi goes to 1015. Flosi returns from Rome to Norway, and stayswith Earl Eric, Earl Hacon's son. 1016. Flosi returns to Iceland ; Kari goes to Rome, andreturns to Caithness ; his wife Helga dies out in Iceland. 1017. Kari returns to Iceland, is reconciled with Flosi, and marries Hildigunna Hauskuld's widow.</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">Sea-Roving and the Viking Spirit</h2>
<p>quite to my mind ; I will now make that clear to theshipmasters and all the crews, that each man shall buskhim in his room, and arm himself as he best can ; afterthat we will row up to them, but if they are Christianchapmen, then it will be in our power to make peacewith them ; but if they are heathen, as I feel sure theyare, then Almighty God will yield us that mercy thatwe may win the victory over them. But of the war-spoilwhich we get there, we shall give the fiftieth penny topoor men.’ After that men got out their arms andheightened the bulwarks of their ships, and made themselves ready according to the means which they had athand ; the earl settles where each of his ships shouldrun in ; and then they made an onslaught on her byrowing, and pulled up to her as briskly as they could. “ But when those who were on board the dromedarysaw that ships were rowing up to them, and that menmeant to make an onslaught on them, they took silkenstuffs and costly goods and hung them out on the bulwarks, and then made great shoutings and hailings ; andit seemed to the earl’s men as though they dared the Northmen to come on against them. Earl Rognvaldlaid his ship aft alongside the dromedary on the starboard, but Erling aft too on the larboard. John and Aslak, they laid their ships forward each on his own</p>
<p>board, but the others amidships on both boards, and allthe ships hugged her close, broadside to broadside. Andwhen they came under the dromedary, her sides were sohigh out the water that they could not reach up withtheir weapons, but they [the foe] poured down blazingbrimstone and flaming pitch over them ; and it was as Erling guessed it would be, that the greatest weight ofweapons fell out beyond the ships, and they had noneed to shield themselves on that side. And when theymade no way with their onslaught, the bishop shovedhis ship off and two others, and they picked out andsent thither their bowmen, and they lay within shot, and shot thence at the dromedary, and then that onslaught was the hardest that was made ; then those [onboard the dromedary] got under cover, but thought littleabout what those were doing who had laid their shipsunder the dromedary. Earl Rognvald called out thento his men that they should take their axes and hewasunder the broadside of the dromedary in the partswhere she was least iron-bound. But when the men inthe other ships saw what the earl's men were about, theyalso took the like counsel. Now where Erling and hismen had laid their ship a great anchor hung on thedromedary, and the fluke was hung by the crook overthe bulwark, but the stock pointed down to Erling's</p>
<p>ship. Audun the red was the name of Erling's bowman ; he was lifted up on the anchor-stock, but afterthat he hauled up to him other men, so that they stoodas thick as ever they could on the stock, and thencehewed at the sides as they best could, and that hewingwas by far the highest up. And when they had hewnsuch a large door that they could go into the dromedary, they made ready to board, and the earl and his men gotinto the lower hold, but Erling and his men into theupper. And when both their bands had come up onthe ship, there was a fight both great and hard. Onboard the dromedary were Saracens, what we call Mahomet's unbelievers. There were many blackamoors, and they made the hardest struggle. Erling got there agreat wound on his neck near his shoulders as he sprangup into the dromedary ; that healed so ill, that he borehis head on one side ever after ; that was why he wascalled wryneck. And when they met, Earl Rognvaldand Erling, the Saracens gave way before them andran to the forepart of the ship, but the earl's men thenboarded her one after another ; then there were more ofthem, and they pressed the enemy hard. They saw thaton board the dromedary was that one man who was bothtaller and fairer than the others ; the Northmen held itto be the truth that that man must be their chief. Earl</p>
<p>Rognvald said that they should not turn their weaponsagainst him if they could take him in any other way ; then they hemmed him in and bore him down with theirshields, and so he was taken, and afterwards carried tothe bishop's ship, and few men with him ; but everyother man's child they slew, and got much goods andmany costly things. When they had ended the greatestpart of their toil, then they sate down and rested themselves. Then the earl sang this :—</p>
<p>‘ Famous in victorious glory, Erling, brave in battle, went ’Gainst the galleon, tree of spears, When our banners dripped with blood ; Low we laid the swarthy champions, Blood of foemen then was shed Far and wide, and soldiers brave Died their keen-edged faulchions red.’</p>
<p>“ And again he sang—</p>
<p>‘ We make up our minds to win The galleon, slaughter this I call ; At early dawn the warrior crew Reddened all their blades in gore ; North and from the north the lady Of this shower of spears will hear Up to Nerbon ; from our people Foemen suffered life-loss sad.’</p>
<p>“ Men spoke of these tidings which had happenedthere, and then each spoke of what he thought he had</p>
<p>seen; and men talked about who had been the first toboard the ship, and could not agree about it. Thensome said that it was foolish that they should not allhave one story about these great tidings ; and the endof it was that they agreed that Earl Rognvald shouldsettle the dispute ; and then they should all back whathe said. Then the earl sang :—</p>
<p>‘ First upon the gloomy galleon Ruddy Audun went with eager Daring, and the warrior dauntless Soon dashed on to seize the spoil ; There at last we reached to redden Weapons in our foemen’s blood ; Mankind’s God hath ruled it so ; On the planks fell corses black.’</p>
<p>“ When they had stripped the dromedary, they put fireinto her and burned her ; and when that tall man whomthey had made captive saw that, he was much stirred, and changed colour, and could not hold himself still. But though they tried to make him speak, he said nevera word, and made no manner of sign, nor did he pay anyheed to them whether they promised him good or ill. But when the dromedary began to blaze, they saw asthough a flaming wave ran down into the sea, that movedthe captive man much. They were quite sure then thatthey had looked for the goods carelessly, and now the</p>
<p>metal had melted in the heat of the fire, whether it weregold or silver. Earl Rognvald and his men sailed thencesouth under Sarkland, and lay under a burg of Sarkland, and made a seven nights' truce with the townsmen, andhad dealings with them, and sold them silver and othergoods. No man would buy the tall man. And afterthat the earl gave him leave to go away, and four menwith him. He came down the next morning with atrain of men, and told them that he was a prince of Sarkland, and had been driven away to sea thence withthe dromedary and all the goods that were aboard her ; he said too he thought that worst of all that they burntthe dromedary, and made such waste of that great wealththat it was of no use to any one. ‘But now I have greatpower over your business here, and now ye shall havethe greatest good from me for having spared my life, and treated me with such honour as ye could, but I would be very willing that we saw each other neveragain ; and so now live safe and sound and well.’ Afterthat he rode up the country, but Earl Rognvald sailedthence south to Crete, and lay there in very foul weather.”*</p>
<p>Who is there on reading this stirring story thatis not reminded of Drake, Hawkins, and Cavendish, those sea-dogs of Elizabeth’s days, laying their little</p>
<p>ships aboard great galleons and carracks, and huggingthem broadside to broadside, as Earl Rognvald did the Dromedary, and thus winning wealth and fame byprivate war on the King of Spain, having, as old Fullersays, a clear case “in sea-divinity,” where “few are suchinfidels as not to believe doctrines which make for theirown profit.” But lest any should say that Earl Rognvald’s exploitagainst the Dromedary was not a proof that the old Viking spirit still existed, we have only to turn to thesame Orkney Saga farther on, and read what we hear ofthe deeds of one who was as thorough a Viking as Rolf Ganger, or any of the old heathens. This was the famous Sweyn Asleif’s son of Gairsay in the Orkneys, who waslong the terror of the western seas. In the year 1171, long after the death of Earl Rognvald, which happenedin 1158, Sweyn, who had been one of his adherents, ledthe life described in the Saga as follows :— “When Hacon, Earl Harold’s son, was but a fewwinter’s old, Sweyn Asleif’s son offered to take him ashis foster-child, and he was bred up there, and as soonas ever he was so far fit that he could go about withother men, then Sweyn had him away with him a searoving every summer, and tried to honour him in everything. It was Sweyn’s wont at that time, that he sate</p>
<p>through the winter at home in Gairsay, and there hekept always about him eighty men at his own cost. Hehad so great a drinking-hall, there was not another asgreat in all the Orkneys. Sweyn had in the spring hardwork, and made them lay down very much seed, andlooked much after it himself. But when that toil wasended, he fared away every spring on a viking-voyage, and harried about among the Southern isles and Ireland, and came home after midsummer. That he calledspring-viking. Then he was at home until the cornfields were reaped down, and the grain seen to andstored. Then he fared away on a viking-voyage, andthen he did not come home till the winter was onemonth off, and that he called his autumn-viking.</p>
<p>“These tidings happened once on a time, that Sweyn Asleif’s son fared away on his spring-cruise, then Hacon Earl Harold’s son fared with him; and they had fiveships with oars, and all of them large. They harriedabout among the Southern isles. Then the folk was soscared at him in the Southern isles, that men hid alltheir goods and chattels in the earth or in piles of rocks. Sweyn sailed as far south as Man, and got ill off formoney. Thence they sailed out under Ireland and harried there. But when they came about south under Dublin, then two keels sailed there from off the main,</p>
<p>which had come from England, and meant to steer for Dublin ; they were laden with English cloth and greatstore of goods was aboard them. Sweyn and his menpulled up to the keels and offered them battle. Littlecame of the defence of the Englishmen, and there theyrobbed them of every penny which was aboard thekeels, save that the Englishmen kept their wearingapparel and some food, and went on their way afterwardswith their keels, but Sweyn and his men fared to the Southern isles and shared their war-spoil. They sailedfrom the west with great pomp. They did this as aglory for themselves when they lay in harbours, thatthey threw awnings of English cloth over their ships. But when they sailed into the Orkneys, they sewed thecloth on the fore-part of the sails, so that it looked inthat wise as though the sails were made altogether ofbroadcloth. This they called “the broadcloth cruise.” Sweyn fared home to his house in Gairsay. He hadtaken from the keels much wine and English mead. Now when Sweyn had been at home a short while, hebade to him Earl Harold and made a worthy feast againsthis coming. When Earl Harold was at the feast, therewas much talk amongst them of Sweyn’s good cheer. The Earl spoke and said :—‘ This I would now, Sweyn, that thou wouldest lay aside thy sea-rovings ; ’tis good</p>
<p>now to drive home with a whole wain ; but thou knowestthis, that thou hast long maintained thyself and thymen by sea-roving, but so it fares with most men wholive by unfair means, that they lose their lives in strife, if they do not break themselves from it.' Then Sweynanswered and looked to the Earl, and spoke with asmile, and said thus :—' Well spoken is this, lord, andfriendly spoken, and it will be good to take a bit of goodcounsel from you ; but some men lay that to your door, that ye too are men of little fairness.' The Earlanswered :—' I shall have to answer for my share, but agossipping tongue drives me to say what I do.' Sweynsaid :—' Good, no doubt, drives you to it, lord ; and soit shall be, that I will leave off sea-roving, for I find that I am growing old, and strength lessens much in drenching seas and warfare ; now I will go out on my autumncruise, and I would that it might be with no less glorythan the spring-cruise was ; but after that my warfaringshall be over.' The Earl answers :—' 'Tis hard to see, messmate, whether death or lasting luck will come first.' After that they dropped talking about it. Earl Haroldfared away from the feast, and was led out with fittinggifts ; so he and Sweyn parted with great love-tokens. &quot; A little after Sweyn busks him for his roving cruise ; he had seven long-ships and all great. Hacon, Earl</p>
<p>They held on their course first to the Southern isles, andgot there little war-spoil ; thence they fared out under Ireland, and harried there far and wide. They fared sofar south as Dublin, and came upon them there verysuddenly, so that the townsmen were not ware of thembefore they had got into the town. They took theremuch goods. They made prisoners there those men whowere rulers there in the town. The upshot of theirbusiness was that they gave the town up into Sweyn’spower, and agreed to pay as great a ransom as he choseto lay upon them. Sweyn was also to hold the townwith his men and to have rule over it. The Dublinmen swear an oath to do this. They fared to their shipsat even, but next morning Sweyn was to come into thetown, and take the ransom, place his men about thetown, and take hostages from the townsmen. Now itmust be told of what happened in the town during thenight. The men of good counsel who were in the townheld a meeting among themselves, and talked over thestraits which had befallen them ; it seemed to them hardto let their town come into the power of the Orkneyingers, and worst of all of that man whom they knew to bethe greatest robber in the western lands. So they agreedamongst themselves that they would cheat Sweyn if they</p>
<p>might. They took this counsel, that they dug greattrenches before the burg-gate on the inside, and in manyother places between the houses where it was meantthat Sweyn and his men should pass, but men lay inwait there in the houses hard by with weapons. Theylaid planks over the trenches, so that they should falldown as soon as ever a man's weight comes on them. After that they strewed straw on the planks so thatthe trenches might not be seen, and so bided themorrow.</p>
<p>&quot;On the morning after Sweyn and his men arose andput on their arms ; after that they went to the town, and when they came inside about the burg-gate the Dublin men made a lane from the burg-gate right to thetrenches. Sweyn and his men saw not what they weredoing and ran into the trenches. The townsmen theyran straightway to hold the burg-gate, but some to thetrenches, and brought their arms to bear on Sweyn andhis men. It was unhandy for them to make anydefence, and Sweyn lost his life there in the trench, andall those who had gone into the town. So it was saidthat Sweyn was the last to die of all his messmates, andspoke these words ere he died : 'Know that all men, whether I lose my life to-day or not, that I am one ofthe Saint Earl Rognvald's body-guard, and I now mean</p>
<p>to put my trust in being there where he is with God.’ Sweyn’s men fared at once to their ships and pulled away, and nothing is told about their voyage before they comeinto the Orkneys. There now is an end of telling about Sweyn, and it is the talk of men that he hath been mostof a man for his own sake in the western lands, both ofyore and now-a-days, of those men who had no highertitles of honour than he.”*</p>
<p>Here again in “the broad-cloth cruize” of thisveteran Viking, we are reminded of the return of thegallant Captain Cavendish in the year 1589, after hehad sailed round the world and captured the Santa Anna, belonging to the King of Spain. “The passingup of the river of Thames by Mr. Cavendish,” says Captain Francis Allen, writing to Antony Bacon, 17th August 1589, “is famous, for his mariners and soldierswere clothed in silk, his sails of damask, his topmastscloth of gold, and the richest prize that ever was broughtat one time into England.”† In fact, sea-roving seemsto have been in full vigour all through the middle ages. Chaucer’s Shipman, “good fellow” though he was, hadfew scruples—</p>
<p>“ Ful many a draught of win he hadde draw From Burdeux ward, while that the chapmen slepe. Of nice conscience toke he no kepe ; If that he faught, and hadde the higher hand, By water he sent hem home to every land.”</p>
<p>Nor had the old Viking spirit at all died out duringthe days of the Tudors. If Drake and Cavendishanswered in their goodness to Thorwald and Gunnar, we must not forget that there were other rovers whofor wickedness, were a match to the worst of the old Vikings. “ The sea,” says Mr. Turnbull, writing ofthe reign of Edward the Sixth, “ was swept by privateers, who were little better than pirates, who plunderedwithout scruple, and without discrimination of friend orfoe, every vessel which came in their way.” *</p>
<h3>QUEEN GUNNHILLDA.</h3>
<p>THE life of this remarkable woman merits more attention than could be devoted to it in the Introduction. Shewas the daughter of Auzur Toti, a man of rank and note</p>
<p>of Helgeland, and after she had risen in life by her wedding and wickedness, wild stories ran as to her teachingin youth. She had been sent by her father, it was said, to Finnmark to learn witchcraft from the Finns; andsome believed that Mattul, the Finnish king himselfwas her master in magic. At any rate there she waswhen Eric Bloodaxe, Harold Fairhair’s darling son, sailedback from Biarmaland or Permia, whither he had beenon a Viking cruize. As they ran by the coast of Finnmark, some of Eric’s men landed and went up thecountry. There they found in a hut a beautiful maiden, who told them her story, how she was Auzur’s daughter, and how her masters were the two wisest wizards in all Finnmark; they could run a scent like dogs, both onfrozen and unfrozen earth; they glided so swiftly onsnowshoon that neither man nor beast could overtakethem; their arrows hit whatever they aimed at; andwhen they were angry, the landscape turned round at theirglance, and if any living thing came before their eyes, itfell straightway dead to earth. But from masters theyhad both become lovers, and from the burden of theirwooing she besought Eric’s men to set her free. The Finns were just then both out hunting, and the wily Gunnhillda, who had not been taught their lore in vain, hid the newcomers in the hut, and strewed something</p>
<p>which looked like ashes outside and inside the cabin. When the Finns came home, they asked if any onehad been there, and were astonished to hear her say “ No;” for they had followed the trail right up to thehut, and then lost it. When they had eaten and werefull, she bade them lie down to sleep, one on eitherside of her, which they readily did, for neither hadhad any sleep for three days and nights, as each, jealous of the other, had not dared to take any rest. Soshe watched as they slept, and roused them up fromtime to time, to be sure that they were sound asleep. At last, as they slumbered and slept, she drew two sealskins over their heads, fastened them round their waists, and then gave the king’s men a sign to rush in andslay them. This was now an easy task. An awfulstorm arose as the spirits of the wizards passed fromearth, but Eric’s men waited till its fury was spent, and then made for their ships, and brought Gunnhillda to their lord, who took her on board his ship, carried her to her father in Helgeland, and then andthere married her. So ran the strange tale, in all likelihood a pure fable, though, as Munch well remarks, thefame of the Finns or Lapps as wizards was deep rooted, and the belief in their power of witchcraft so widelyspread, that it is likely enough that parents, especially</p>
<p>in a neighbouring district to Finnmark like Helgeland, may have really sent their children to that race of sorcerers to learn their black arts. The truth of the matterprobably is, that Eric fell in with the beautiful maidenon his return from Permia, and that the only witchcraftpractised in the matter was that worked by Gunnhillda’slovely face and artful mind, which held her husband inbondage ever afterwards. She is described as having beensmall of stature, but fair of face, of commanding mien, deep-thinking, glibspoken and fairspoken, grim-tempered, fickle in friendship, and very greedy of goods andland. Her husband was hard-hearted too, and greedyof gain too ; he was a valiant champion and a luckywarrior, but in wit he was no match for his wife, for hewas thoughtless, and had little forecast. In a word, he was made to be the slave of such a wife, and shebecame his evil genius. As to her age, she seems to have been born about 908, and to have been not more than fourteen years oldwhen Eric’s men met her in Finnmark. As for Erichimself, he was born about 900. At twelve years ofage his father fitted him out for his first Viking voyage, and for the next ten years he was almost always at sea. For four years he was the scourge of the eastern waters, and for another four years his course lay west. About</p>
<p>920 he returned to his father, who was then growingold, and shared his realm amongst his sons, giving to Eric a rank above the rest, but retaining the supremacyfor himself. In 922 Eric went to Permia, and found Gunnhillda on his return. For ten years after Harold Fairhair had so shared his kingdom there was constantstrife between his children. At last, unable to checktheir brawls, the aged king laid down the kingdomaltogether in 930, resigning the supremacy to Eric, anddied over eighty in 933. Before his death he had seenseveral grandchildren born to Eric and Gunnhillda, andone called Harold, afterwards surnamed Grayfell, was tosucceed his father. Eric Bloodaxe had thus been threeyears supreme king over Norway when his father died, and meantime Gunnhillda had not been idle. “Theirtime was short,” says Fagrskinna, “but still the peoplethought it over long, for they called the king easy tempered, but as for the queen, she was the unkindest ofwomen. It soon came out, too, that Eric had causedhis brothers, Bjorn the chapman, and Olaf thickleg, andmore of them to be slain, and it was the common talkthat he meant to cut off all his brothers and so reignalone over the kingdom, and then raise his sons to thewhole realm after his own days, and thus he becamehated by the whole people.” But Harold Fairhair had</p>
<p>a son beyond the reach of Gunnhillda ; this was Hacon, whom his father had sent to be fostered at the court ofthe great English king Athelstane, for which reason hewas called Hacon Athelstane’s foster-child. The yearafter his father’s death he set sail for Norway, and landing in a province which did not acknowledge Eric’s sway, he soon found such favour in the freemen’s eyes, chieflyby freeing them from the odious tax which Harold Fairhair had laid upon their alledial holdings, thatthey one and all declared Harold Fairhair had comeback again ; not the worn-out, grasping Harold of hislatter days, but the young, warlike, blooming Haroldwho had won his way to glory. Between two princes, the one so popular and the other so hated, the strugglewas not long doubtful. At first one province declaredthat they would have Hacon for their king, then another, and another, and at last, two years after his father’sdeath, Eric had to flee the land, and leave the kingdomto his brother. He betook himself to England, andfound favour with King Athelstane, who gave him thelordship of Northumberland on condition that he shouldnot molest his brother, the king’s foster-child, in Norway. But Eric was a restless spirit, and as he thought howsmall Northumberland was when matched with thewide lands which his father Harold Fairhair had left</p>
<p>he took again to the sea. His chief lurking placewas the Orkneys, and there Gunnhillda married Ragnhilda, a woman who was a worthy daughter of suchmother, to Earl Havard, the son of Earl Thorfinnskull-splitter. With the aid of his followers and connections, Eric wasted France, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales with constant inroads, returning in the winterto his lordship in Northumberland. So things went onso long as Athelstane lived, but after his death, hishalf-brother Edmund, who hated the Northmen, tookaway Northumberland from Eric. This laid Englandopen to the sea-king, who now had so large a host thatfive kings followed him to war. Brave and lucky, Eric trusted too much to his good fortune, and venturedup the country, wasting it far and wide. Edmund sentagainst him Olaf, or Anlaf, one of his tributary kings, and Eric was overborne by numbers in a bloody battleand fell, with the five kings who followed him, as well as Arnkel and Erlend, the Orkney earls. This was in theyear 941. Gunnhillda was then, in all likelihood, withher daughter in Orkney; with all her faults, she seemsto have loved her Viking lord, and had an ode madeon his death, the beginning of which has been handeddown to us, and which is a very grand piece of poetry.</p>
<p>ERIC'S DEATH SONG.</p>
<p>&quot; What dreams !&quot; Odin spoke &quot; Methought ere day broke I garnished Valhalla For glory-full folk, Fast up from the fray Flitted forms of the fey, I wakened the warriors, Hah ! I bade them rise up Benches to furnish, Beer stoups to burnish, Valkyries bore wine-cup As though came a king. Hither from earth This morning must part Warriors of worth ; Expect them ere evening, Glad is my heart.&quot;</p>
<h3>ODIN ASKS.</h3>
<p>&quot; O Bragi ! Why under A thousand doth thunder Our rainbow bridge ? Answer, What bodeth this host.&quot;</p>
<p>‘ Lintel and rooftree, rafter and bar, Settle in hall, eke pillar and post, As these men march onward, tremble and jar, Quiver and quake, shiver and crack ; Hall-doors fly open, wall-weapons rattle: In glory excelling, From Hell’s gloomy dwelling, With whirlwind of battle Our Balder comes back.”</p>
<h3>ODIN ANSWERS.</h3>
<p>‘ Unwisely now Bragi, Though wise, hast thou spoken : Valhalla kens better— Not Baldr’s this token— For Eric it groaneth, I tell thee his fall ; Each champion so trusty, His lord now bemoaneth, With weapons war-rusty He wends to our hall.”</p>
<h3>ODIN SPEAKS.</h3>
<p>‘ Sigmund and Sinfjotli Up with you lithely, Out with you cheerily Eric to greet, Bid him in blithely— See ! He steps wearily, All up the rain-arch, Long is the day’s march—</p>
<p>Hasten the hero on threshold to meet ; Dreary the journey ’Neath buckler and byrnie, Hasten to bear up our chosen one’s feet.”</p>
<h3>SIGMUND ASKS.</h3>
<p>“ Why Eric of all Other kings must thou call ?”</p>
<h3>ODIN ANSWERS.</h3>
<p>“ Because his brand ruddy, Clove helm after helm Because his blade bloody Smote realm after realm.”</p>
<h3>SIGMUND ASKS.</h3>
<p>“ Why snatch him then, father, From fortune and glory ? Why not leave him rather To fill up his story On victory’s road ?”</p>
<h3>ODIN ANSWERS.</h3>
<p>“ Because no man knoweth When grey wolf so gory His grisly maw showeth In Asgard’s abode ; Therefore Odin calleth, And Eric fain falleth, To follow his liege lord, and fight for his God.”</p>
<h3>SIGMUND SPEAKS.</h3>
<p>“ Hail to thee Eric now, Heartily welcome thou !</p>
<p>QUEEN GUNNHILLDA. 387</p>
<p>Enter thou haughty king, Enter the hall ; I ask but this only, What Princes from far Come with thee ; not lonely Thou surely hast hastened, Leaving the battle where foemen fell chastened, Hither to Heaven, from hurly of war ?&quot;</p>
<p>&quot; Kings five,&quot; Eric said, &quot; Their names I will tell, I the sixth, at their head, In the gory fight fell.&quot;</p>
<p>After the death of Eric, Gunnhillda found shelter withher sons at the court of Harold Gorm's son, surnamed &quot; Blue tooth,&quot; or &quot; Waxy tooth.&quot; The Danish king eventook her son Harold, known in our Saga as Harold Grayfell, as his foster-child, and aided both mother and sonsin repeated attempts to recover their footing in Norway. Time after time they were worsted, and two or more ofthe princes slain by King Hacon. At last in the battleat Fitje, in 960, where Harold Grayfell had again beenbeaten by his valiant uncle, an arrow, after the fight waswon, pierced the shoulder of King Hacon. The rudeleechcraft of those days was unable to staunch the bleeding, an artery had been touched, and the best of Harold Fairhair's line bled to death. The belief of the age held Gunnhillda guilty of the deed, and thought that by her</p>
<p>black arts she had wrought the death of her foeman bylaunching against him a magic shaft. It was clearly arandom shot from some bow drawn at a venture whichpierced the harness of the king as he followed on thefootsteps of the fleers. After Hacon’s death Harold Grayfell succeeded tothe central portion of Norway, at the express wish it issaid of the dying Hacon. But this central portion ofthe land was too narrow for Gunnhillda. To the north, in Drontheim, ruled Earl Sigurd of Hladir, one of Harold Fairhair’s chieftains ; south and south-east in the Uplands and in “the Bay,” ruled Gudred and Tryggvi, twograndsons of Harold Fairhair, and therefore Harold Grayfell’s first cousins. It would be long to tell the story of Gunnhillda’s plotting against these rivals near her throne, suffice it to say that first Earl Sigurd, and then both Gudred and Tryggvi fell victims to her guile. Gunnhillda, “Kings’ mother” as she was called, and herchildren, were now supreme rulers in Norway. It was ahard time in every way for the people. Harold Grayfell, who seems not to have been without a rough humour ofhis own,* and who was brave in common with all his race,</p>
<p>was merely a tool in the hands of his mother. She hadbeen brought back by foreign aid, and her aim was torely not on the people so much, as on foreign aid tosupport her power. In those days the anger of heavenagainst princes and people was thought even more thanin our time to be shewn in natural phenomena, so whenharvest after harvest failed as soon as Harold Grayfellbecame king, that was thought to be a sign from heavenagainst the wickedness of the reigning house. It is at thisperiod of Gunnhillda’s power that our Saga shews us howshe ruled at the King’s Crag in “the Bay ;” with regardto the relations of the queen with Hrut, we leave the Saga to speak for itself, only adding that other Ice-</p>
<p>put into the Hardanger Firth, where King Harold then was. When they broke bulk and began to trade, few cared to buy thecargo. The captain, who was known before to Harold, went tohim and complained that trade was so dull. The king said hewould come and see him, and shortly after put out in a wellmanned galley. As soon as he got on board he looked at thewares, and asked the captain if he would give him “a grayfell,” or cape of gray fur. “With all my heart,” said the captain, “and more too, if you will.” So the king took the cape andthrew it over his shoulders, and with that went over the sideinto his boat. But before he rowed away every one of his menhad bought himself a cape, and in a few days after there wereso many in the town that wished to buy capes, that the wholecargo was not enough to meet half the demand. After that theking was called “Grayfell.”</p>
<p>landers found favour in her sight as well as the stalwartswordsman of the Western Dales.* At this time, 963, Gunnhillda must have been at least fifty-three years old, and Hrut about thirteen years younger. Laxdæla, whichhowever is not so sure a guide as our Saga, tells us that Gunnhillda, after she had led him down to the ship, madehim a speech full of praise, and given him a gold ring, “threw her cloak over her head and went back hastilyto the town.” So things went on in Norway for six years after Hrutwent back to Iceland. The fall of Gunnhillda and hersons is an instance of retribution worth recording. When Earl Sigurd of Hladir was cut off, he left a son whoproved a far more formidable enemy than his father evercould have been. This was Earl Hacon, afterwards knownby the name of the “mighty,” or the “bad,” as heathenor Christians spoke of his rule. He was of middlestature, fair in face, well skilled in arms, and very craftyand deep thinking. When his father died he was abouttwenty-five years of age, and for a time was able to holdhis own against Gunnhillda. But when, shortly after, both Gudred and Tryggvi, who had been his allies, were cut off by treachery, Hacon was forced to fly,</p>
<p>and after wasting Norway year after year, at last tookshelter with king Harold, Gorm’s son, in Denmark. Itmay seem strange that he should fly for refuge to Harold Grayfell’s foster-father; but Gunnhillda, bytaking possession of the provinces round the Bay, andespecially by settling herself at the King’s Crag, hadbroken an agreement made with the Danish king, wholooked on those border provinces as his own. Now it was that Earl Hacon began to shew that hewas a greater master in craft and guile than Gunnhilldaherself. King Harold Gorm’s son had a nephew named Gold-Harold, so called from the great wealth which he hadwon by Viking voyages. He was a bold warrior, and, asthe son of the Danish king’s elder brother, had awkwardclaims to the crown. In fact he was a king without acrown, and eager to wear one. No wonder, then, thatlittle love was lost between uncle and nephew. Soonafter Earl Hacon reached the Danish king’s court hefeigned illness and kept his lodging. Both the kingand Gold-Harold came to see him, and both laid opentheir griefs to him. At last Earl Hacon told the kingthat it would be better to try and get Gold-Haroldsome other realm instead of Denmark, to which hehad clear claims. “What did he say to helping himto become king of Norway?” The king thought Nor-</p>
<p>foster-child. “A foster-child,” answered Hacon, “who has repaidyou badly for all your help. As for the rest, I do notsay make war on Norway, but send over and ask Harold Grayfell to come over and take up the fief which belongsto him here in Denmark, and when he comes Gold- Harold can fall on him and so win Norway.” “Very true,” said the king, “but ’tis an ill deed tobetray one’s foster-child.” “Better kill a Norse Vikingthan thine own Dansk nephew,” was the answer. In this way the king’s consent was got, and at thesame time Earl Hacon urged Gold-Harold to do thedeed and win Norway, adding, that once master of thatrealm, he would find it easy work to recover Denmarkwhen Harold Gorm’s son died. So a splendid embassy was sent to Norway to greet Harold Grayfell in the king’s name, and to say that ashe had heard how hard the times were in Norway, hehad sent to bid King Harold Grayfell to come with 200 men and take Jutland as a fief for that winter. Theembassy at the same time said that Earl Hacon lay atdeath’s door. Though some suspected guile, the end of Harold Grayfell’s counsel was that he should go. Towards the end of summer he set out with three ships</p>
<p>and eighty men in each. They ran into Liinfirth, wherethey were told to wait for the king. There Gold-Haroldcame against them with nine war-ships in full trim. After a brave fight Harold Grayfell’s little band werecut off to a man, and the first act of this tragedy was</p>
<p>It is said that with his dying breath Harold Grayfellforetold the like fate for his adversary ; nor was it longdelayed. No sooner was the black deed done than Earl Hacon began to work on the Danish king’s fears. “ ’Twere a foolish thing to suffer Gold-Harold to seizeon Norway. Only last winter he told me he meantto kill you.”</p>
<p>“ But it is not seemly in me to kill my nephew,” said Harold Gorm’s son.</p>
<p>“ Well,” answered the crafty earl, “ I will undertaketo win Norway for you in a single day, and to beyour faithful vassal and pay you tribute, if you willagree to take a compensation from me for killing yournephew.” *</p>
<p>So the matter was settled, and Earl Hacon, who hadtwelve or fifteen ships all ready for sea, put out to seek</p>
<p>Harold Grayfell. It was no hard thing to conquer himwhen he and his men were wounded and weary withfight. So, after a gallant struggle, Gold-Harold wascut off. Earl Hacon seized the gold from which the Danish prince derived his surname, and with it hepaid the uncle the compensation for the death of thenephew. So far all the authorities agree. After this pointsome of them, and Snorro Sturla's son amongst the rest, say that King Harold Gorm's son raised a mighty host, with which he sailed for Norway, whence Gunnhilldaand the sons she still had left fled before him. Hethen installed Earl Hacon as his vassal with supremepower, and returned to his own realm. This accountleaves it uncertain where the wicked queen died; buther last shelter would in all likelihood have been the Orkneys, where her daughter Ragnhilda, after plottingthe death of husband upon husband, was still in power. But according to other, and those not less trustworthychroniclers, a far other doom overtook Gunnhillda. Theseauthorities tell us, that Earl Hacon hastened to Norwaywhile King Harold Gorm's son was gathering his host, boasted to Gunnhillda that he had avenged her son'sdeath on Gold-Harold, and told her that he was the</p>
<p>bearer of a message from the aged king of Denmark, that if she would come to visit him he would make herhis wife. This offer was too much for the lustfulwoman. She set sail with three ships, and on landingin Jutland was met by the king's men, who were to leadher to the bridal feast. For a while the journey wentwell, but at nightfall, as they passed a dreary moor, hercompanions seized and plunged her into the morass, which was called afterwards “Gunnhillda’s moss.”*</p>
<p>If this story be true, and it is not so unlikely assome have wished it to seem, Earl Hacon had takenample revenge for his father’s murder on Gunnhillda andher wicked house. Some have seen a strange corroboration of the story in the fact, that in the year 1836 there was found, near the ancient royal residence of Haraldskjær, at Veile, in Jutland, in a moss now called “Juthemose,” the body of a woman staked down into</p>
<p>the morass. She was small of stature, of middle age, and wore a dress which, in the distant time to whichthe wearer plainly belonged, might have been of costlymake and material. On this discovery, a controversy of some warmtharose in Denmark over these miserable remains, whichended, as such strife always ends, in no positiveresult. As the Northmen often employed this mode ofexecution on criminals of the weaker sex, as it is notcertain that King Harold Gorm’s son lived at Haraldskjær, and as Juthemose, though it perhaps might bedistorted out of Gunnhilldasmose, does not positivelyspring from that name; all that can be said for the storyis, that, like the ownership of Alfred’s jewel in the Ashmolean Library at Oxford, it must always remain aproblem whether this body was or was not that of Gunnhillda Kings’ mother; but, in conclusion, we may remarkthat the question, whether the remains were hers or no, in no way affects the authority of the story which tellsof her tragical end in Jutland—a story which rests, inour opinion, on ground as firm as that which leaves it amatter of doubt how, or in what country, the wickedqueen was overtaken by her last enemy.*</p>
<h3>Notes</h3>
<p id="note-sea-roving-1">Orkn. Saga. New ed. vol. i. pp. 359-69.</p>
<p id="note-sea-roving-2">Orkn. Sag., new ed., vol. i., pp. 461, 471.</p>
<p id="note-sea-roving-3">Athenæ Cantabrigienses, II., p. 546; (comp. p. 136 foll.) Cambridge, 1861.</p>
<p id="note-sea-roving-4">Calendar of State Papers, Foreign Series, 1547-1553, 1861, a work most ably and faithfully executed, but destined, alas! to remain unfinished, a monument of Protestant intolerance, in a land where liberty of conscience has hitherto been held to prevail.</p>
<p id="note-sea-roving-5">In this account of Eric's fortunes, Fagrskinna has been mainly followed. The dates are Guðbrandr Vigfússon's. The reader, who wishes to see a critical examination of all the autho- rities, must consult Munch, N. H. I., 726 foll., where Eric's fall is placed in the year 950.</p>
<p id="note-sea-roving-6">This is shown in the way in which he got his surname, “Grayfell.” It happened one summer, as we are told by Snorro Sturla’s son, that a ship from Iceland, laden with skins and furs,</p>
<p id="note-sea-roving-7">Olaf the peacock for instance, Hrut’s nephew, Laxd. 73, 75, 85 ; and Thorgils Scarleg’s foster-child.</p>
<p id="note-sea-roving-8">Unless this agreement had been made beforehand, Harold Gorm’s son would have had the blood feud against Earl Hacon, and might have taken his life in turn.</p>
<p id="note-sea-roving-9">The authorities for this story are,—(a), Olaf Tryggvi’s son’s Saga, in the Flatey Book ; (b), Ágrip, a short Chronicle of Nor- way, ch. x. ; and, (c), The Monk Theodorick, ch. 6 ; and (d), The Jomsvíkinga Saga. Three at least of these authorities are respectable enough ; and, though the Jomsvíkinga Saga may be a late and romantic work, it by no means necessarily follows that it is untrue in giving this story. Nor is it, though Munch asserts it, at all clear that the story in all these authorities springs from one and the same source. It is remarkable, too, that Ágrip and Theodorick are Norwegian and not Icelandic authorities.</p>
<p id="note-sea-roving-10">See Munch, N. H. ii. 54, 55, who leans strongly to the side which asserts that Gunnhillda did not die in Jutland. See also</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">Money and Currency in the Tenth Century</h2>
<p>The question of money and currency in Iceland, inthe tenth century, is one of great difficulty, that difficulty being much increased by the fact that the sumsand proportions mentioned in the Sagas and Laws relateto a period at which the currency and the standards ofthe tenth century had undergone great changes. In aword, the writers apply the currency and standards oftheir own age to one which in those respects was widelydifferent. The following are the results of much inquiryinto the matter. In early times there were two standards of value—measure, and weight, and two materials,</p>
<p>two essays by Petersen in the Annaler for Nordisk Oldkyndighed, who thinks it probable that she died in Jutland, and that thebody found was possibly hers. See on the other hand, Worsaae, Hist. Tidskrift, iii. p. 244-292. On the whole it was a verypretty quarrel. It is remarkable, however, that in the speechput into King Olaf Tryggvi's son's mouth in the Flatey book, whenconverting Earl Sigurd, he only speaks of “ most of Gunnhillda'ssons having been cut off (afráðnir) though Ragnhilda was stillalive.” Now, it would seem probable that the zealous king, had thewoman who slew his father met with such a just retribution, would scarcely have failed to make a point of her fate in his “ long and able speech,” by mentioning her along with her sons, and so alluding to the manner of her death.</p>
<p>to which those standards were adjusted—wadmal* orwoollen cloth for measure, and silver for weight. 1. In the standard of woollen or measure, the unitywas the ell, and its multiples up to a hundred. Thishundred being the long hundred of twelve tens, or 120.† This standard, which was called that of measure or tale, was the currency of the island in old times, and stillexists in Iceland as the national currency (landaurar, talið) at the present day. All landed property, and goodsand chattels are valued in it ; and when it is said thatsuch and such a bit of land, or such a herd of cattle, orso much furniture are worth 20, 60, or 80 hundreds, themeaning of the words, and the value of the property, is aswell understood as both would have been in Njal’s time. 2. In the standard of weight or silver, the unity wasthe ounce, or eyrir (pl. aurar), eight of which made the</p>
<p>mark (mörk) or pound. But as time went on, these twostandards were confounded together, and though ells andhundreds belonged originally strictly to the woollenstandard, or that of measure alone, and ounces (aurar), and marks (mörk) to that of weight alone, men began tospeak of hundreds of weighed silver, and of measured orreckoned ounces and marks of woollen. So that, thoughit was etymologically right only to talk of weighedmarks, and measured or reckoned hundreds, andetymologically wrong to talk of weighed hundredsand measured or reckoned marks, still custom and convenience soon broke through etymological rules, andthus we find ounces and marks used to express thecountry currency by measure and tale, and ellsand hundreds weighed to express the silver standard. This confusion between ounces and marks bytale, and ells and hundreds by weight, was worse confounded by the introduction, at a very early time, offoreign minted silver or coin, which of course would bereckoned by tale. In the tenth century there seems tohave been but one such coin, the penning, or Anglo- Saxon penny, of which vast numbers found their way tothe north by trade and war.* It is improbable that there</p>
<p>were such coins at the period of which we write as marksor ounces, but that, when those sums are mentioned, they were weighed or made up by tale from the coinswhich we have mentioned. But in those days silver bytale and silver by weight were one and the same thing. Having thus explained the two standards of weightand tale, and shown how they became confounded interms, while remaining distinct in fact, we proceed toinquire, what proportion the woollen currency by talebore to the silver currency by weight. How did thehundred ells by tale stand with regard to the hundredin silver by weight. This naturally varied at differenttimes, but about the year 1000 the proportion was asfour to one. According to Grágás four hundreds inwoollen, and twenty yards as margin, were thenequal to one hundred in silver, and the passage is soremarkable, that it is worth quotation at length. It is</p>
<p>of Hacon Athelstane’s foster-child, who died 960 ; in fact, it is aquestion whether there were any coins struck in his reign at all, for one which has been found bearing the name “ Hacon ” maybe ascribed to Earl Hacon. In any case, according to Munch, thenumber of Norwegian coins in circulation, if any existed at all, must have been very few, while the quantity of Anglo-Saxoncoins found all over the north shews that they must have passedcurrent everywhere. In later times the “ örtug,” a Norwegiancoin, is spoken of as well as the “ penning :” the eyrir or ouncecontained three örtugs.</p>
<p>there said, sect. 245, ed. Kbh. 1856, “At that time, when Christianity came out hither to Iceland, silver wascurrent in all great dealings. It was to be pale silver, and must stand cutting, and be most part silver, and ifit were coined, so coined that sixty* pennies made an</p>
<p>ounce weighed, and then silver by tale and silver byweight was all one. A hundred in silver was thententh part of an eyrir.” Again—“Lögsilfr et forna þat er xpenningar göra eyri.”—Grág. II. 188, 4to. “The old law-silver, of which ten pennies make an ounce.” But here again a puzzlingqualification is added—“Oc meir se silfrslit á en messingar, oc þoli scor, oc se jamt utan sem innan.” “And which has morethe hue of silver than of latten, and which will bear cutting, andis alike outside and inside.” In all such qualifying expressionsin MS. of the thirteenth century, as to the purity of silver, onecannot help thinking that the scribe, when speaking of the oldstandard silver, applies to it the legal stipulations required forthe “lög-silfr” or “law-silver” of his own, and that a muchlater, day. This “bleikt silfr,” or “gangsilfr,” or “lögsilfr,” this “pale,” or “current,” or “lawful silver,” in which the silverjust turned the scale over the alloy, which was more of a silvernthan a brazen hue, and which was even in colour and fibrethroughout, was the legal silver currency of the thirteenth century, and may be reckoned as worth 2s. 6d. an ounce. Opposed toit, as superior in purity, was “skírt silfr,” or “brendt silfr,” “puresilver” or “burnt silver ;” and as inferior in purity, grásilfr orblásilfr, “gray” or “blue silver.” We know from Grágás (II. 193, 8vo), that early in the thirteenth century a mark of this pureor burnt silver was worth an ounce of gold “that would standthe fire,” and these were each worth sixty ounces of law silver ; in other words, the proportion between pure silver and law silverwas then almost eight to one, and the proportion between pureor burnt silver and gold was exactly as eight to one, since therewere eight ounces or eyrir in every pound or mark. As for “gray silver” or “blue silver,” we are told by a MS. in the Arna-Magnæan Library at Copenhagen, 732, p. 16, that it was “thirty times less valuable than gold.” All these facts point to</p>
<p>reckoned the same as four hundreds and twenty* ells ofwadmal, and then the ounce (of silver) was worth half amark of wadmal.”</p>
<p>It now remains to inquire into the value of thesestandards respectively in English money.† It appears,</p>
<p>a rapid depreciation of the silver standard, attended, as we shallsee, by a proportionate rise in the woollen currency. The ounceof silver, which, at the calculation of 4s. 6d. to the eyrir, wouldhave been worth twenty-five ells in the tenth century, wasonly worth six in the thirteenth. Thus Grágás II. 192, 8vo. —“Þat er fiarlag at Althings male at vi alnir vaðmáls gilldznytz oc onotit scolo vera í eyre.” “This is the scale of goods bythe custom (or decree) of the Althing, that six ells of good newand unworn wadmal shall be worth an eyrir.” Later still, thereappears to have been further depreciation, if we may judge fromthe expressions “þriggja alna eyrir,” which seems to mean an ouncein which the silver was only worth three ells. But these questions of the different proportions of the wadmal currency in thethirteenth century are of immense difficulty, and we gladly leavethem to return to an earlier age.</p>
<p>from the most reliable inquiries, that the value of the Norwegian eyrir or ounce which was the unit of thesilver standard was 4s. 6d., from which it follows thatthe penny, of which there were to be twenty in anounce weighed, would be worth nearly twopence threefarthings sterling. As there were eight ounces in amark, the worth of that weight of silver would bethirty-six shillings. As the mark of wadmal was equalto a fourth part of the silver mark, its value would benine shillings. With respect to the value of one hundred in silver, or four hundred and twenty ells in wadmal, the most reliable researches have shewn it to beequal to twenty ounces or aurar, or two marks and ahalf, and consequently its value in English moneywould be £4 : 10s. for the silver hundred.</p>
<p>These would be the values of the eyrir or ounce, mark, and hundred, supposing the purity of the silverto have been equal to that of our standard silver ; andthere is every reason to believe that this was the case</p>
<p>The Anglo-Saxon ounce, which was no doubt the same as theold Tower ounce, weighed 450 grains Troy, and the old Cologneor German ounce weighed 451·38 grains Troy. This old Norwegian ounce of 412·58 grains Troy, as compared with the present Troy ounce of 480 grains, shews the value of the silver inthe former to have been very nearly 4s. 6d., assuming the presentprice of standard silver to be 5s. 2d. an ounce.</p>
<p>in the tenth century. In the first place, we are actuallyin a position to test the purity of the silver then currentin the North. It was almost all English, and the researches of Ruding and others have proved that the Anglo-Saxon coins—however deficient some of themmay have been in weight, partly from design and partlyfrom the rude appliances of the Anglo-Saxon Mint—arein fact of the same purity as our sterling silver, andthat our standard is in fact the Anglo-Saxon standard. In the next place, we know that Anglo-Saxon coins werecarried to Iceland in large quantities. The penny which Grim Goatshoe got from every household for surveyingthe island, before the Althing was established in theyear 929, was no doubt an English penny ; the moneywhich Egil brought back to Iceland after the Battleof Brunanburg was Anglo-Saxon money; and so, too, there is little doubt that the penny, or scatt-penny, which Eyvind Scaldspoiler got, in the reign of Harold Grayfell, from every household in Iceland for hispoem in praise of Icelanders, and which we are expressly told was equal to three weighed pennies of alater age, was an Anglo-Saxon penny.* For these</p>
<p>reasons, both because we know the exact weight ofsilver in the old Norwegian ounce, and because weknow that the silver of which it was ordinarily composed was pure, we are inclined to think that the valuesgiven above will be found to be correct. It is, however, very evident that the “pale (bleikt) silver” mentionedin the extract from Grágás, “which would bear cuttingand be most part silver,” was considerably alloyed, and ifthe writer is actually describing the silver current in theyear 1000, and not rather the gangsilfr or lögsilfr of hisown day, then the silver of the tenth century must havebeen worth far less in English money. As it was to be “most part silver,” we may assume that the ounce ofthis “pale” silver, or law-silver, would be 2s. 6d., inwhich case the mark would have been worth only 20 shillings sterling, the mark of wadmal only 5 shillings, and the hundred in silver or four hundred andtwenty ells in wadmal £2 : 10s.</p>
<p>In a tabular form the relative proportions of thetwo hundreds, as well as their values respectively in English money at 4s. 6d. and 2s. 6d. an ounce, wouldstand as follows:</p>
<p>was written down, and that the old Anglo-Saxon penny was thenworth three later pennies of the same weight, but each containingonly a third of the pure silver in the old coin.</p>
<p>| 100 (120) in Silver. | 100, 120+5† in Wadmal. | Mark Silver. | Mark Wadmal. | | | 125 ells = 22s. 6d. | oz., eyrir, silver. | oz., wadmal. | | | 5 ells = 10¾d. | 4s. 6d. | 1s. 1½d. |</p>
<p>| 100 (120) in Silver. | 100 120 + 5 in Wadmal. | Mark Silver. | Mark Wadmal. | | £2 : 10s. | 12s. 6d. | 20s. | 5s. | | | 125 ells = 12s. 6d. | oz., eyrir, silver. | oz., wadmal. | | | 5 ells = 6d. | 2s. 6d. | 7½d. |</p>
<p>With regard to the relative value of these suns inthe tenth century, it may occur to some readers thatthe proportion of four to one between the silver standardand the wadmal currency is too low, especially if wesuppose that the silver of the tenth century was equal toour standard silver ; but in making this comparison, itmust be remembered that in the tenth century the precious metals were more abundant and in less demandthan they were in succeeding centuries. There was lesscoining and more barter, less want of money as a circulating medium, and more of it hoarded. Commerce</p>
<p>and Viking cruizes brought a rich store of silver intothe north, which lay idle except when its owner wascalled on to complete a large bargain, or to pay someblood-fine at the bidding of the law. There was thenno difference, as we have seen from Grágás, betweensilver by tale and silver by weight, but a century or twoafter, when Viking voyages had almost ceased, and thesupply of silver into the North was cut off, there was avery great difference between sums paid in coin whichwere clipped and debased, and so depreciated, and payments by weight in pure silver.* In the tenth century, we have seen that the value of the eyrir or silver ounce</p>
<p>would be twenty-five ells of wadmal, but in later times, as it became debased, it was only worth six, and laterstill, only three ells of the woollen currency. Then arosethat distinction, which we are expressly warned by ourauthorities not to accept as existing in earlier times ; then it was that silver by tale and silver by weightbecame two different things. Then it is that we firsthear of örtugs as well as pennies, and of marks andounces and örtugs by weight, which were six times asvaluable as the same sums by tale. It is very doubtfulwhether these sums by tale are another way of expressing the old proportion between the silver and woollen</p>
<p>him as though the silver in which they had been paid was notpure ; so he tossed it up with his other hand, and down fell allthe silver on the straw.&quot; Fornm. S. vi. 243. This Haldor wasson of our friend Snorri the priest. He had been King Harold'scompanion in Constantinople ; and he now complained so bitterlythat he could not get his pay without cheating, that, though therest of the king's men were content with the debased coin, Haroldhad to give Haldor twelve ounces of &quot; burnt silver,&quot; with whichhe was content. It may be inferred from this passage, that upto that time the silver current in the north had been pure. Infact, just when the kings in the north began to coin, the sourcewhence they had drawn their supplies of the precious metalswas stopped. England and the west ceased to be the battlefieldof the Northmen, and the value of silver rose rapidly. With therise came the usual arts of a scanty exchequer—clipping anddebasement of the standard, followed as certainly by a corresponding rise in the necessaries of life.</p>
<p>standards, or whether they represent a further depreciation of the silver currency intercalated as it were betweenthe lögsilfr, which in that case would be equivalent tothe weighed currency, and the landaurar or woollenstandard. But this again is a question which does not somuch concern us in the tenth century, and which wemay leave with the earnest wish, that some Icelanderfitted for the task may yet unravel this tangled web.*</p>
<p>If we apply the data at which we have arrived toour Saga, we shall find that while all the fines, bót, insuits are in the standard of silver, whether by weight orin coin, all other transactions within the country are inthe woollen or national currency. Thus when Mord pays</p>
<p>Hrut sixty hundreds as her portion, that means thesixty hundreds in wadmal, which would be a great portion as compared with Hrut’s landed property and hisship.* Again, when Flosi bargains with the Easterlingfor his ship, and had over and above 20 hundreds inwares, those were hundreds in wadmal and not in silver. When Flosi gave Eyjolf the gold ring which was worthtwelve hundreds in russet stuff,† equal to 288 ounces in</p>
<p>though this russet stuff was reckoned as dearer than theordinary wadmal. According to Grágás (II. 193, 8vo.), 5 ells of it went for the eyrir or ounce when 6 of the ordinary wadmal went for that sum. If the ounce be reckonedat 4s. 6d., the ring would have been worth £64 : 16s. in ourmoney, if at 2s. 6d., £36. With regard to the bót or compensation for manslaughter, there can be no doubt thatthe oldest way of paying it was by ring-tale (at baugatali), and that those blood-fines were connected in someway with the rings used in religious worship. It seemsto be universally agreed, that in the graduated scale ofthose rings mentioned in Grágás—þrímerkingr* (threethe weights and measures in those islands followed the standardsof the mother country, thus the “ure” or “ore” in Orkney isonly another form of “eyrir.” It too was the 8th part of a mark, and was the fundamental unit of weight and value in Orkney. In Shetland we find the cuttel or cut ell, as the fundamental unit, six of which went to the “ure,” this cut ell being the ell ofwadmal. In fact, the unity in Orkney began one step higher up, while in Shetland the old woollen currency of six ells to the “ure” or “eyrir” was retained.—See Mr. Balfour’s “Oppressionsin Orkney and Zetland.” Edinburgh, 1859. Glossary sub voc. “ure,” “mark,” and “cuttel.”</p>
<p>marks) = 24 oz., tvítugauri = 20 oz., tvímerkíngr (twomarks) = 16 oz., and tólfeyringr 12 oz., the 2d of 20 oz. or two marks and a half in silver, was equivalent toa hundred in silver. The rate of these compensationsvaried in different times, but in the tenth century, twelveounces in silver, or a silver ring of that weight, wasreckoned the fitting compensation for the loss of a thrall, and accordingly, we find that price paid more than oncefor thralls in our Saga. At the same period, one hundred in silver was the price of a freeman who had nofixed abode of his own, and lived at service in anotherfreeman’s house. Thus, we find this sum paid in our Saga for Atli, whose bargain, on remaining in Njal’sservice had been, that if slain he should not be paid foras a thrall. A like amount was paid for Brynjolf theunruly, and in both instances it is added that thatprice was the blood-fine for a freeman. So also in thecase of Thord Freedman’s son, Njal tells his sons thathe had been paid for at the rate of two men, the pricehaving been two hundreds in silver. But, at the sameperiod, there can be no doubt, that the common pricefor a freeman who had a house and land of his own wastwo hundreds in silver, and in the case of Thorwald, of Lightwater a fee of three marks to utter the law. And finally, Mord Valgard’s son made himself liable to a fine of three marks, for wrongly summoning the neighbours on the inquest.</p>
<p>Halgerda’s first husband, we are expressly told that twohundreds in silver were reckoned “ a good price fora man.” This price was paid by Hauskuld for theslaying of Thorwald, as well as in several other cases inour Saga. When the man slain was of great rankor worth, a higher price was put on him. Thus Hauskuld, Thrain’s son, was to have three times theordinary price, or six hundreds in silver, put uponhim, and when all the body of freemen at the Althingcontributed to pay an atonement for Ljot, Hall of the Side’s son, the sum collected amounted to no less than 8 hundreds in silver, or four times the common price. With regard to Njal, though the Saga says that he waspaid for with a threefold price, this in all probabilitymeans that his blood-fine was three hundreds. Perhapsthe amount of money to be collected in all, when somany other blood-fines had to be paid at the same time, may have helped to lower his price.* But in all thesesums we think we see a fresh proof that the hundred</p>
<p>in Njal's time was £4 : 10s., rather than £2 : 10s. A man of Njal's worth was surely worth £13 : 10s., and £7 : 10s. would have been too little for him.* We mayfairly conclude, that when there was so much moneyin the island, and when, in every other relation of life, the freeman was valued so highly, the price paid to hisfamily for his loss would have been on the higher ratherthan on the lower scale.</p>
<p>In conclusion, we may briefly mention the darkestside of this whole inquiry. We have made out the proportion between the silver and the woollen standards, and shown that they stood in the relation of four to onein the tenth century ; but unless we can ascertain theproportion in which the woollen standard stood to thenecessaries of life at the same date, we shall be unableto fix the true value of the silver standard. Absolutely and intrinsically the silver oz. was worth 4s. 6d., and relatively to the wadmal currency of the tenth century it was worth four times as much as the woollen oz., in which all the dealings of daily life were transacted. But relatively to the nineteenth century, or in other</p>
<p>words, the amount of goods which could be bought in Iceland for 4s. 6d. in the tenth century, compared withwhat could be bought there for 4s. 6d. now, would dependentirely on the amount which could be bought then by theounce of wadmal ;—whatever that might be, four timesthat amount could be had for the silver ounce. On thispoint, however, our authorities afford us little information, and we can only conjecture, that the oz. of wadmalin those days was worth about four or five times as muchas it is now. A cow in Iceland at the present day isworth one hundred in wadmal, or £1 : 2 : 6, and sixwethers may be bought for the same sum. In earliertimes, no doubt, four or five cows might have beenbought for the same sum, and we shall probably not bewrong if we conclude, that the value of money in Iceland in the tenth century, as compared with what it isnow, would be about 8 or 9 to 1, and that the threefoldblood-fine which was paid for Njal would have beenabout equal to £100* at the present day. A sum certainly not too great for one of the wisest and mostvirtuous men which that island has ever reared.</p>
<h3>Notes</h3>
<p id="note-money-currency-1">Icel. vaðmál. The word is still alive in Orkney and Shet- land ; see Jamieson’s Dict. sub voc. “ vadmell” and “ wadmaal.” It was also known, according to Grose, in some parts of England as “ woadmel.”</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-2">Wherever the figure C for hundred occurs in the Sagas, this invariably means the long hundred of twelve tens (tólfrætt) ; tíu tíu is ased to express ten tens. Guðbrandr Vigfússon thinks that the old Icelandic ell was only half the length of the English ell of three feet, and he draws this inference from the fact, that English yard-wide cloths and stuffs are called two ells (tvíelnt). This, per- haps, is scarcely sufficient evidence as to the old ell ; but if it be cor- rect, Skarphedinn’s leap across Markfleet shrinks from 24 to 18 feet.</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-3">According to Munch N. H. I. 799, it is doubtful whether there was any coin struck in Norway before the end of the reign</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-4">This is probably an error for twenty. The editor of the new edition of Grágás remarks, in a note, that the scribe seems to have written two x’s, which were afterwards altered to lx, The ounce in early times would have been coined into twenty Anglo-Saxon pennies ; but when the standard was debased, as it was when this MS. of Grágás was written, it would have been coined into sixty pence. The scribe, in copying an older MS., first wrote the xx as it stood in the original, and then altered the sum to suit the standard of his own time. There can be no doubt that in the thirteenth century sixty pennies went to the eyrir. Thus Snorro Sturla’s son, in the Heimskringla, speaking of St. Olaf’s attempt to tax the Icelanders—“Penning . . . þann er x væri fyrir alin vaðmáls.” “A penny, ten of which would go for an ell of wadmal ;” as in Snorro’s time it is certain that six ells of wadmal went to the ounce, there would be sixty pennies in the ounce. At the same time the New Gula Thing’s code in Norway speaks of thirty pennies to the ounce. “En xxx peninga skal eyri hvern, hvárt sem gengr vegit eða talt.”—N. G. L. 1., 225. “But thirty pennies shall be in every eyrir, whether it be by weight or by tale.” It is very remarkable that Grágás speaks in two places of x pennies only as going to the eyrir, and that it calls silver of this kind “the old law-silver.” “Penning skal hann gefa goða þeim er hann leiðir í lög, þat skal hinn tíundi hlutr eyris vera.”—Gr. I., 357, 4to. “He (the thrall that is made free) shall give a penny to the priest who brings him into the law (who admits him to legal rights), that shall be the</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-5">These twenty ells were a margin or maketale, given over and above the proper quantity. They answer to the extra 6d. in the pound which was paid into the early English Exchequer when payments were made by weight (ad scalem), and answered to the Trebuchet in France, as so much thrown in to turn the scale. See Madox Hist. Excheq. ; and Thomas, “The Ancient Exchequer of England,” p. 25.</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-6">The researches of M. C. A. Holmboe (De priscâ re Mone- tariâ Novegiæ Christ. 1844, p. 3. Comp. The Numismatic Chronicle, 1857, pp. 149-50) have shewn that the weight of the Norwegian eyrir or ounce was equal to 412·58 grains Troy.</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-7">When it is said that this scatt-penny equalled three weighed pennies, this is another proof that the standard had been debased at the time when the account of the gift to Eyvind</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-8">This 5 ells is the fourth part of the 20 ells of margin.</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-9">It is curious that the first of the kings who ruled in Eng- land, who gave systematically bad weight, was Canute.† This would be between 1017-36. The theoretical weight of the Anglo Saxon penny should be about 22 grains, and Ethelred the unready not only gave that amount, but more, some of his coins weighing as much as 26 grains. Canute’s, on the other hand, rarely exceed 16 grains, and in one instance fall as low as 13 ; still the silver was pure. We may infer from the following passage in the Saga of Harold the stern, who died A.D. 1066, that, up to his time, the coinage in Norway had not been debased. “ But when the eight day of Yule came, then their pay was given to the king’s men. That silver was called ‘ Harold’s coin,’ it was the more part copper. But when Haldor took his pay, he put it into the skirt of his cloak and looked at it, and it seemed to</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-10">This fact has been pointed out to the translator by his friend Mr. John Evans, F.S.A., of Nash Mills, whose authority on all matters relating to British and Anglo-Saxon coins is unquestionable.</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-11">The following table will shew the relation of these two silver standards, as well as of the woollen currency or landaurar in the thirteenth century, when the standard of six ells to the silver ounce or eyrir was current. | Marks. | Marks. | Oz. | Örtug. | Oz. | Örtug. | Ells. | | (Mörk) | (Merkur) | (Aurar) | (Ortngar) | (Aurar) | (Ortugar) | (Alnir) of | | weighed | by tale | weighed | weighed | by tale | by tale | Wadmall, | | (vegin.) | (taldir.) | (vegnir.) | (vegnar.) | (taldir.) | (taldar.) | (vadmals.) |</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-12">Guðbrandr Vigfússon informs me that Kamness and Hrutstede are now valued at thirty-six, or nineteen, hundreds by the old and new Icelandic valuations respectively (see Skýrslur um Landshagi á Íslandi, I., 694, 5). It is plain that Unna’s portion was reckoned in the wadmal currency from Mord’s words afterwards with regard to Mord’s property in Norway, which was worth a hundred (120) marks. When Mord calls that much goods or money compared with what his daughter would have from him, he means, in fact, to say that his daughter’s portion, which was sixty hundreds in woollen, was little compared with this Norway inheritance of 120 marks by weight. If Unna’s portion had been sixty hundreds by weight or in silver, each worth two marks and a half, it would have been much more than a hundred marks in silver, and Mord could not have spoken of it as a small sum compared with Hrut’s inheritance.</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-13">In Icelandic Mórendr, neut. mórendt; and modern Ice- landic móraudr, neut. mórautt. No one who has been in Shet- land can be in doubt as to the colour, for there he will find “moratt” or “morutt” everywhere used for the russet wool, which is the natural colour of so many of the fleeces in those islands. It is remarkable as showing the close connection which was kept up between Norway and Orkney and Shetland, that</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-14">This ring or sum of three marks runs throughout the Saga. Thus, when Mord reclaims Unna’s dower from Hrut, he couples his demand with a fine of three marks. Again Otkell and Skam- kell give Mord three marks for his help in finding out Hall- gerda’s theft. So again Hall of the Side gave Thorgeir the Priest</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-15">It is evident that throughout the Saga there is a doubt on the writer’s mind whether the blood-fine in the tenth century was one, or two hundreds, in silver. Though in one place we are told that two hundreds were then thought a good price for a man, in another Njal tells his sons that Gunnar, who had just paid him two hundreds in silver, had atoned for the foster-father, Thord Freedman’s son, as for two men. In the twelfth and thir- teenth centuries the number of hundreds paid was much higher.</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-16">Kormak, the passionate lover, valued Steingerda dearer ; each of her eyes was worth three hundreds, her hair five hundreds, but all Steingerda was worth England, Ireland, Hunland, Den- mark, and Iceland.</p>
<p id="note-money-currency-17">If his fine was three times the sum often paid for freemen of position, or six hundreds, this amount would of course be doubled.</p>
<!--se:split-->
<h2 epub:type="title">Additions and Corrections</h2>
<p>Introduction, x. “The lions of the Acropolis.” This is incorrect. The lion on which a runic inscription is carved stood in the Piræus, not on the Acropolis. When the Venetians, under Francesco Morosini, took Athens in the year 1687, this lion, which is of colossal size, was carried away as a trophy; it now stands at the entrance to the Arsenal at Venice. The runes on it, which were first discovered by Åkerblad, a Swedish traveller, at the end of the last century, have recently been deciphered and published from photographic copies, together with a very able explanation by the distinguished Secretary of the Kongelige Nordiske Oldskrift-Selskab, M. C. C. Rafn, who has shown that the inscription records the capture of the Piræus by no less a person than King Harold Hardráda, who, before he mounted the throne of Norway, was captain of the Varangians at Constantinople. See Antiquarisk Tidsskrift, 1855-57. Kbh., 1857. “En Nordisk Runeindskrift i Piræus, med Forklaring af C. C. Rafn.”</p>
<p>P. xxxiii, note, last line, for “mother” read “wife.”</p>
<p>P. lxxvii. In the Introduction the account of Guðbrandr Vigfússon (Timatal, p. 286) has been followed as to the relationship which existed between Asgerda, Njak, and Thorgeir Craggeir. That account is based on the following passages from Landuáma, p. 279, Kph., 1843 :—“Ofeig was the name of a man of rank in Ronisdale province; he had to wife Asgerda, the daughter of Ask the silent. Ofeig fell out with King Harold Fairhair, and busked him for an Iceland voyage; but just as he was “boun,” king Harold sent men to him, and his life was taken; but Asgerda fared out to Iceland with their children, and along with her Thorolf, her base-born brother. Asgerda took land between Selialandsmull and Markfleet, and all Langaness up as far as Ioldustone (or Auldustone) and set up her abode to the north in</p>
<p>Kataness. The children of Ofeig and Asgerda were Thorgeir Gollnir and Thorstein bottle-beard, Thorbjörn the quiet and Alof Ellidashield, whom Thorberg Cornmull had to wife. . . . Thorolf, the brother of Asgerda, took land at her counsel to the west ofthe Fleet between the two Deildarwaters, and dwelt at Thorolf'sfell ; there he reared Thorgeir Gollnir, Asgerda's son, who dweltthere afterwards ; his son (Thorgeir's) was Njal, who was burntinside his house.&quot; A little earlier in the same chapter, p. 278, occurs the following passage :—&quot; Thorgeir of Hordaland, the sonof Bard Minglehorn, fared from Viggjar in Drontheim to Iceland. He bought land from Asgeir fishhook between Lambfellswaterand Ersewater, and set up his abode at Holt. A few winters (years) after he got Asgerda to wife, the daughter of Ask thesilent, and their sons were Thorgrim the big and Holt-Thorir, the father of Thorleif crow and Craggeir.&quot; According to thesestatements, Thorgeir Gollnir and Holt-Thorir would have beenhalf-brothers by the same mother, Asgerda, who would have been Njal's grandmother, while Njal and Thorgeir Craggeir wouldhave been first cousins. On the other hand, nothing can be more positive than thestatement of our Saga, that Asgerda, the daughter of Lord Ar thesilent, was Njal's mother, that Thorgeir Gelling or Gollnir was Njal's father, and that another son of Asgerda's was Holt-Thorir, the father of Thorgeir crow and Craggeir. By this account Njaland Thorgeir Craggeir would have stood in the relation of uncleand nephew, and it is remarkable that Thorgeir Craggeir himself (II., p. 190) calls Njal his father's brother, and Njal's sonshis cousins. In spite of Landnáma we think that the account inthe Saga, so far as the story itself is concerned, is the more reasonable of the two statements, especially as, if Njal and Thorgeir Craggeir were really first cousins, the one must have been nearlyforty years older than the other ; but if they are regarded asuncle and nephew, it would seem perfectly natural that a nephewof forty should be the avenger of an uncle of eighty.</p>
<p>According to Landnáma. 1st Husband, OFEIG ASGERDA = 2d Husband, THORGEIR of Hordaland THORGEIR GOLLNIR HOLT-THORIR NJAL. THORGEIR-CRAGGEIR.</p>
<p>According to the Saga. ASGERDA THORGEIR GOLLNIR SKARPHEDINN, etc. THORGEIR CRAGGEIR, etc.</p>
<p>P. cxiv. For “ máttmáll” read “ náttmál.”</p>
<p>Saga I. P. 1, note, for “ Olaf” read “ Oleif.” Pp. 3, 4. “ High Court.” This court is the same as “ Lögretta” or “ Court of Laws.” 14. According to Munch, NH. I. 755, Earl Arnvid fled from Vermeland and not from Jemtland. 29. For “ Reykriverdale,” in this and other places read “ Reykiardale.” 47. “ For one oath shall not become all oaths,” a proverbtaken from the Law, and meaning “ there is an exception to every rule.” Comp. Sveinbjörn Egilsson Dict. sub voce eiðr. 75. For “ Oxwater” read “ Axewater.” 80. The “ his” in the passage “ His mother’s name,” etc. refers to Asgrim Ellidagrim’s son, not to Ellidagrim. 83. Biarmaland, the reference to the foot-note is wanting. 91. “ Hehnrod” in the verses is a periphrasis for a sword. 102. “ Thorkatla Asgrim Ellidagrim’s son’s daughter.” The Saga sometimes calls this woman Thorkatla and sometimes Thorhalla, though more often the latter. Guð- brandr Vigfússon, Tímatal, doubts whether Helgi wasmarried at this time, and suggests that this might be Thorkatla Asgrim’s wife and not Thorhalla his daughter. Comp. Introduction, p. lxxxvi. 147. “ Thord Longbeard.” In another place (see p. 80) the Saga speaks of Thord as though he were Skeggi’s son ; here “ Skeggi the bearded,” or “ Longbeard,” is usedas a nickname, and there is a link less in the genealogy. 151. “ The Side.” The description of “ the Side” in the noteis not exact. “ The Side” was the Hillside in Skaptarfell’s Sýsla between the river Skaptá and Skaptarfell ; beyond the river, between it and the sea was Medalland (Middleland).</p>
<p>159. “Hallkell, thy grandfather, who was the greatest ofchampions.” This Hallkell was the half-brother of Kettlebjörn the old. He slew Grim of Grimsness andtook his landnám. Comp. Introduction, p. lxxix. P. 177. “Gunnar leapt off his horse,” rather “slipped off hishorse.” Comp. p. 236. 196. For “Knafaholes” read “Knafahills” here and in theother passages in which the name occurs. 200. For “holes” read “hills.” 204. For “Gunner” read “Gunnar.” 235. For “Olof Kettle’s son” read “Olaf Kettle’s son.” 248. For “Horsebeck ” read “Hestbeck.”</p>
<h3>VOL. II.</h3>
<p>P. 20. In the last line, for “room” read “hall.” 22. “Either that I will tell where thou art.” By so doing, according to legal custom, Hrapp would have clearedhimself of his own outlawry. 24. “Thorgerda Shrinebride.” This divinity was the daughter of Helgi or Haleygr, a mythical king of Halogaland or Helgeland. This province, the name of whichmeans “The Holy Land,” seems to have been theseat of a peculiar worship. (Comp. Völsapáttr, published by Guðbrandr Vigfússon, together with Bár- ðar Saga Snaefellsáss, and other romantic pieces, Kph. 1860). Thorgerda, who was also called “Holgabrud” or “the Bride of Helgeland, was worshipped, togetherwith her sister Irpa (the fair), by the families whichsprang from Helgeland. Earl Hacon’s father Sigurdwas so descended. Her father’s name occurs in our Saga, Vol. ii. p. 115, in the genealogy of Gudmund thepowerful. Comp. Færeyinga Saga, ch. 23, where anaccount of Thorgerda sitting in Earl Hacon’s shrine at Ladir will be found. It was a kerchief or snood, “falld,” and not a wimple that she had on her head. 50. “Listeners do not often hear good of themselves,” theliteral meaning of the original is rather “many areworse spoken of than they would choose.” 56. “Twelve ells, about twenty-four feet,” etc. This would</p>
<p>be according to the length of the present Norse ell, but there is reason to believe that the old Norse ellwas not more than an English foot and a half. Thewidth of Skarphedinn’s leap would therefore be eighteenfeet. Comp. Appendix, II. 358 and 398. 81. “But still ye run great risk,” etc. These words of Flosiseem rather to allude to the danger which existedbetween Hauskuld’s family and Njal’s, on account of Thrain’s slaying. 92. “Torch,” Skriðljós, perhaps more probably means alantern. Comp., Bergbúa Þáttr, Bárðar Saga Snæ- fellsáss, p. 124, Kph., 1860. 105. “A dark horse.” The Icelandic, “vanfoli,” or “váfoli,” answers exactly to this sporting term. The horse wasfour years old, but Mord called it an untried foal. 105. “Folkmote.” This was the “Leið,” or “Leet,” in theautumn. 121. Chap. cxv. In this chapter, the Saga writer seems tohave applied the arrangement of the Icelandic Skáliin the twelfth or thirteenth century to the time of Njal. The “sitting-room,” or “stofa,” into which Flosi went, was on the dais or “þverpallr,” and bythe description which follows of Hildigunna’s goingbackwards and forwards to the “hall,” it is clear thatthe writer supposed that the þverpallr, at the easternend of the Skáli or hall, was cut off from the body ofthe hall; but we know that this was not the case inthe tenth century. Flosi might have had a high seatset for him on the dais, but that would only have beenon a raised platform at the eastern end, but not in aseparate room cut off from the rest of the hall. Inthe hall of such a man as Hauskuld, there would, wemay be sure, have been ample room for Hildigunna to</p>
<p>go to and fro, without being observed. Comp. Introduction, xcix, c. P. 124. “ Women’s counsel is ever cruel,” “ Köld eru kvennaráð,” literally “ cold,” or “ cold-blooded are women’s redes.” 124. “ Holtford,” on Thurso-water. 139. Adalsyssla, Icel. Adalsýsla, the great or main provinceor government. According to Munch in Fagrskinna, see Glossary, it answers to the modern Esthonia. 152. For “ Hill of Laws” read “ Court of Laws.” 153. When it is said that Flosi and the sons of Sigfus came “ from the east” from their booths to the Court of Laws, and that Njal and his sons came “ from thewest,” this is another proof that Flosi’s booth or Byrgir’sbooth was on the east side of Axewater. Comp. Introduction cxxx, foll. 164. “ And so fares it with Flosi’s redes As this flaming brand flies ;” Sveinbjörn, Egilsson Dict., under “ Kefli,” interpretsthese lines “ ratio Flosii similis est volubili cylindro ;” “ Flosi’s redes are like a rolling wheel orroller ;” and he compares with them the maxim in Pythagoras—“ ὡς δὲ κύλινδροι | ἄλλοτ’ ἐπ’ ἄλλα φέρον- ται.” The translator has, however, thought it morenatural to compare Flosi’s swift and burning counselwith the flaming firebrand which the apparition hurledtowards the spot where the burning of Njal and hissons took place. 185. The Rangriver, so often mentioned in the Saga, is theeastern branch of the river, which now runs in twostreams. This eastern branch rushes between steepscarped banks, across which it is easy to converse whenit is quite impossible to pass it. 297. “ In unclipped coin ;” perhaps this merely means “ without any deduction.”</p>
<p>P. 314. “The Hundred.” This is the fruitful “Hèrað” or “District,” which since Njal’s time has been so cruellydevastated by eruptions from the Skapta-Jokul. 322. “Swanlauga.” Unless this is another name for the samewoman, Earl Gilli must have married two daughters of Earl Sigurd. Comp. above, p. 40, where it is said that Earl Sigurd gave his sister Nereida to Earl Gilli. 323. “Connaught,” a mistake of the Saga for Kincora. Comp. Introduction; p. cxcii. 336. “’Tis fittest that the beggar should bear the bag.” Foran older form of this proverb see Maurer Bek. des 347. For “sitting-room” read “hall.” 348. For “room” read “hall.”</p>
<h3>THE END.</h3>
<!--se:split-->
</body>
</html>