<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chief Settlers in the South-West</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="appendix-10" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Chief Settlers in the South-West</h2>
			<p>After these necessary details we may now turn to our story. In the south-west of Iceland lay a district which soon attracted the eyes of the North men bent on settlement. This was the fertile alluvial plain which lies between the great rivers, Thursowater and Markfleet,<a id="noteref-chief-settlers-1" href="#note-chief-settlers-1" epub:type="noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> and which is watered by the two Rang rivers and many lesser streams. In those days Hekla had not as yet burst forth in fire and flame, no showers of sand or floods of lava had marred or seamed the beauty of the land, which is still so fruitful after centuries of volcanic action. Nor had Markfleet, worst enemy of all, eaten into the bosom of the plain which runs up miles from the seashore, and torn it asunder, to seek the sea by many shifting mouths. He still swept onward to the main, sharp round the spurs of the Eyjafalla Jokul, though in time of flood he threw off some of his strength to swell the channel called Thverá (Cross water), in which the streams which ran down from the uplands were caught and carried away to join Thursowater just before it falls into the sea.<a id="noteref-chief-settlers-2" href="#note-chief-settlers-2" epub:type="noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> This fair expanse, then covered with wood up to the fells, caught the eye of Kettle hæing, a man from Naumdale in Norway, who fled the land in 887 for manslaughter’s sake. With him came his foster brother Baug, and between them they seized, or rather ch. iii., the stream in words that admit of no mistake, that there was such a channel in early times; and besides, the term Land isles (landeyjar) implies that the whole space between Thurs water and Markfleet was severed from the rest of the district by some such channel. The view has been adopted in the text which seems most likely to meet the case. The following very interesting description of this part of the country is from the pen of Mr. Metcalfe, B.D., of Lincoln College, Oxford, who made a lengthened tour in Iceland during the last summer (1860), and has kindly communicated it to the writer:—“The Delta enclosed between the Markarfljót and the Thverá, and cut into two parts by the Affall, is a vast plain, which extends westward farther than the eye can reach, beyond the Thiorsá to the Olfusá. As I stood by the house at Hliðarendi, I saw a dark speck in the distance, which I learnt was Bergthorsknoll. One or two other specks, scattered over the expanse, are also farms, and there is nothing else visible to break the utter flatness of the scene in that direction. “ Breiðabolstaðr, Teigr, and Hliðarendi, lie all of them some hundred feet or so above the dead flat, while behind them the moorland rises upwards, backed at the Hliðarendi end by the fine mountain of the Thríhyrníngr. “ Just under Hliðarendi, to the south, is the miserable remnant of the flat fertile level, which made the spot so dear in Gunnar’s eyes. It is not many feet above the bed of Thverá, which has graved itself into the bank to within a few yards of the ascent on which the house stands. When I saw the Thverá it was not very large, but</p>
			<p>Kettle seized it, for he was the leader, all the mighty tract between the two rivers, and this is said to be about the largest landnám or lot ever taken by any of the old settlers. It took long to fill it, nor was it till about the the great strips of loam, half severed from the bank and covered with grass, showed what the stream can do in its more savage moods. &quot;A mere mountain torrent descends the slope just east of Hlíðarendi, in cascades, Thverá by name, and it no doubt has given the name to the branch of Markarfljót, which it joins just below. &quot;The chief body of water, I was told, sometimes takes one, sometimes another of the three channels. It is supposed (and I think with much probability), that in Njal's time the Markarfljót was one river, and that it wound round the base of the heights which support the Eyjafell Jokul, while the Rauðaskriður (Stóra Dímon), which rises darkly from the flat, lay near to, but on the Hlíðarendi side &quot;East of Hlíðarendi the Delta contracts into a valley, and the triple stream soon becomes one, bounded on the south by the glaciers of Eyjafell Jokul, north by the slopes from the Tindafell Jokul, while the end is apparently blocked up by the Godalands Jokul. A grand scene! &quot;A Danish mile up the valley is the supposed site of Njal's bothy (sel). Close by the house at Hlíðarendi is Gunnar's so-called cairn, where he is said to be buried. &quot;It took me three hours to ride from Breiðabolstaðr to Bergthorsknoll, after crossing the Thverá, the banks of which are quite low. I crossed some wet sand, into which the horses sank, caused by overflows of Thverá, which six years ago flooded a vast extent of country. We kept east, to avoid the worst morasses, and joined the Affall, by the right bank of which we entered on the hard ground.</p>
			<p class="continued">end of sixty years, that is to say, till about the end of the landnámtide, or period of occupation, that it was fully inhabited. We then find the descendants of Kettle living at Hof, at “the Temple,” and we have already</p>
			<p>“ Bergthorsknoll lies within sight of the breakers dashing against the flat shore. It lies on an elevation of a longish shape, at the south-east. This elevation terminates abruptly about a bow-shot from the Affall, and behind it no doubt Flosi hid the horses. Nearer to the river is a squarish depression, called Flosi’s lág, where tradition says the horses were pastured; it is artificial, and of no depth; formerly they say it was deeper. On the opposite side of the knoll is what is called Kari’s pond, a mere puddle.”</p>
			<p>In another communication, in answer to one from the writer asking for information as to the channel by which Grjotá and Thverá (the hill-stream) found their way to the sea before the greater Thverá (Cross-stream) existed, Mr. Metcalfe adds:— “ I crossed the Griotá and lesser Thverá on the flat moor below the slope I mentioned, on the verge of which are the farms. As far as I observed, the river into which they flow has bent considerably to the south before they join it; but I cannot say that I observed this matter particularly; neither did I see their junction with it. I should imagine, that in ancient times they had a small channel of their own after their junction with each other, and that that channel ran very likely pretty much where the greater Thverá river now flows.</p>
			<p>“ I can easily imagine ice or detritus from the mountains in the spring blocking up and impeding the Markarfljót, when rounding the shore under the farm of Mörk, and a good deal of the river thus taking what is in reality a straighter channel, which, after a short space, would bring it into company with the two mountain torrents above mentioned.” seen that his son Rafn was the first Speaker of the Law. Baug Kettle’s foster brother, who is said to have been an Irishman by birth, settled by Hæng’s advice, at ráði Hængs, in Fleetlithe, that is, on the fruitful slope or lithe, as it would be called in some parts of England, which rose toward the fell from the level plain. Here at Lithend (Hlíðarendi) at the end of the slope, he built him a house, and had three sons, Gunnar, Eyvind, and Stein. Late in the days of Kettle, who was not a young man when he came to Iceland, a man of rank and worth, named Sighvat the red, of Helgeland in Norway, came and settled on a portion of his landnám, and became a great chief. He set up his abode at Breidabolstede, west of Markfleet. His son was Sigmund. It so happened that Sigmund Sighvat’s son, and Stein Baug’s son, both wanted to cross the ferry at Sandhol at one and the same time. When they reached the river’s bank a quarrel sprung up between the two bands. Sigmund and his men drove Stein’s house-carles from the ferry boat, and during the scuffle Stein came up and smote Sigmund a blow which proved his death. This, which happened about the year 930, or just when the Althing was established, was the beginning of a mighty feud which lasted for ten years. The suit must have been followed up at law by Sigmund’s next of kin, for all the sons of Baug, and therefore all must have had a hand in the fray, were banished from the Fleetlithe, but they removed to abodes only a little way off. Sigmund had three sons, Mord, Sigfus, and Lambi; and two daughters, Rannveiga and Thorgerda. Thorgerda was married to Önund the little, who lived in Flói, as the rich district between Thursowater and Olvuswater was called. The house in which Stein had set up his abode was near to Flói, and Thorgerda could not bear that her father's slayer should live so near her unscathed. She goaded on Önund to avenge him. He set out with thirty men, set fire to the homestead, and when Stein gave himself up, led him out to the top of a hill and there slew him. Gunnar Stein's brother, as next of kin, now had the blood feud against Önund. He had made a good marriage, for his wife Hrafn hilda was a grand-daughter of Kettle hæng, and her brother Orm the strong was one of the most daring men of the time. They seem, however, to have pursued the feud at first at law, for Önund was made an outlaw for slaying Stein; and though he guarded himself well, and set them at defiance for two winters, at last, one Yule, they caught him in an unwary moment when he was returning from the games, and slew him with three of his men. As Gunnar rode back towards Thursowater he fell dead off his horse from his wounds. When Önund’s sons grew up they betook themselves for legal advice to their uncle, Mord Sigmund’s son, as to how the feud should be followed up at law; but he, whom we shall know afterwards as the first lawyer of his time, said the thing could not be done, as their father had been made an outlaw. They might take revenge if they could. Örn, a kinsman of Gunnar, who had betrayed their father, and who was their next door neighbour, came handiest to them. On some question of pasture rights, no doubt with the help of Mord’s legal skill, they got him made an outlaw everywhere except on his own land and a bowshot out of it. So they watched and watched for him, but he kept within bounds and never gave them a chance. At last they drove a herd of neat over his fields, and in his hurry to chase them out, he overstepped his limit; they rose from their ambush and slew him, and thought no harm could happen to them as he was an outlaw; but Thorleif flash, Örn’s brother, got a famous bowman, Thormod Thiostar’s son, to shoot a shaft from Örn’s boundary towards the spot where he had been slain, and the arrow fell beyond it. Örn, therefore, was unlawfully slain, for he had fallen within a bow-shot of his own land, and stood free to his next of kin to follow up the quarrel at law. Thorleif flash and Hamond Gunnar’s son, set the suit on foot, while Mord stood by his nephew. Owing no doubt to Mord’s skill, it was settled that they should pay no fine but be banished out of the Flói district. By the help of Mord, they were set up in other parts of the country, and the feud ended by Mord’s betrothing his sister Rannveiga to Hamond Gunnar’s son. Hamond then returned to the old house, which Baug, his grandfather, had built on the Fleetlithe, and there at Lithend was born the peerless Gunnar of Lithend, for whom, in goodness of heart, strength of body, and skill in arms, no man was ever a match in Iceland.<a id="noteref-chief-settlers-3" href="#note-chief-settlers-3" epub:type="noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> Close to Lithend, at Gritwater (Grjotá), one of the mountain streams which ran from the uplands into the plain, lived Sigfus, the brother of Rannveiga and Mord. He had seven sons. They were Gunnar's first cousins, and play a great part in our story. Kettle, one of the brothers, and by far the best of them, lived at the Mark east of Markfleet. We must now speak of a settler of another sex. This was Asgerda, the daughter of Lord Ar or Ask the silent. In his struggle for power Harold Fair hair had put her husband to death, a man of rank, and a hersir, that is lord, baron, in Romsdale. Asgerda then left the land, taking her sons Thorgeir Gollnir and Thor old, with her. She settled on land east of Markfleet, between Auldustein and Selialandsmull, and she married, a second time, Thorgeir of Hordaland, who had gone to Iceland from Drontheim, and was settled at Holt under Eyjaattributed to him by Landnáma, but that he was in fact their brother. This would get over the difficulty of time; but the authority of Landnáma is so venerable that its assertions are not lightly to be disregarded, and we may find a loophole for escape, if we suppose, as indeed is suggested by Guðbrandr Vigfússon himself, that Sighvat the red, like many other of the first settlers, had children by a former marriage before he left Norway, that Sigmund was one of those children, and that Rannveiga the first was only his stepmother.</p>
			<p>HOLT-THORIR AND NJAL. lxxvii fells. The son of Asgerda by Thorgeir was Holt-Thorir and his son was Thorgeir Craggeir.<a id="noteref-chief-settlers-4" href="#note-chief-settlers-4" epub:type="noteref"><sup>4</sup></a> In that family was the priesthood to the east of Markfleet. Thorgeir Gollnir, her eldest son, settled at Bergthorsknoll, in what were called the Land Isles, the alluvial flat between the mouths of the rivers Thurso and Markfleet, and there was born, about 930, the hero of our story, Njal, the great lawyer and the foresighted man.</p>
			<p>We must still speak of one or two more families. Beyond Markfleet, to the east again, settled Rafn the foolish, “one of the noblest born of men.” He came out about 900, already an old man; his son was Jorund the priest, and he, not content with his lands and priesthood there away east, settled in the old landnám fashion, on a lot at Swertingsstede, west of Markfleet. He must have been a man of worth and wealth, for he married Thorlauga, the daughter of Rafn, the Speaker of the Law, a granddaughter of Kettle hæing. On Rafn’s death without sons Jorund succeeded, in right of his wife, to the estates at Hof, where stood the mother temple of the district, and he thus became doubly a priest. His sons were Valgard the guileful and Wolf Aurpriest. The latter, on the death of his father, took the priesthood east of Markfleet, which was afterwards called the Dale dweller’s Priesthood, because the head of the family lived at a homestead called “ the Dale,” and there, after the death of Wolf, lived his son, Runolf of the Dale.</p>
			<p>The fortunes of the western branch of Jorund’s house were still more bright; for at a later period Valgard the guileful, who had succeeded to the estate and priesthood at Hof, by a marriage after his father’s example, with Unna Mord’s daughter, and Sighvat the red’s great-grandchild, became possessed of the priesthood of the Rangriver Vales, and so almost the whole of Kettle hæng’s great lot or landnám returned to the hands of one family.</p>
			<p>Late in the Landnámtide came out Kettlebjörn the old. He was of the royal race of Helgeland. He married the daughter of Thord Skeggi, one of the first settlers, and was famous for a ship called Ellidi, which he owned. He settled up the country to the east of Thursowater, and took as his own Laugardale and the Tongues, and</p>
			<p>KETTLEBJÖRN THE OLD. lxxix dwelt at Mossfell. Teit was his son, and Thorhalla, Thorgerda, and Thur ida his daughters. Teit had a son, Gizur the white, who lived at Mossfell, and a daughter, Jorunna, who was married to Ellidagrim, who came from the north country to settle down on Teit’s estates, and who lived at Tongue after marrying his daughter. Their son was Asgrim Ellidagrim’s son. Thorgerda was the mother of Geir the priest, who lived at the Lithe, not far from Bridgewater (Brúará). Of Teit’s family Jorunna must have been much the eldest, for Asgrim the nephew was younger than his uncle Gizur.<a id="noteref-chief-settlers-5" href="#note-chief-settlers-5" epub:type="noteref"><sup>5</sup></a></p>
			<p>Hallkell Kettlebjörn’s half-brother by the mother’s side, came out sometime after him, and challenged a man named Grim, who had taken the whole district called Grimsness as his lot, to give up his land or fight. Grim fought and fell, and Hallkell took his land. His son was Scarf (the cormorant), and his grandson was Otkell, whom we shall meet in the story.</p>
			<p>We must now ask the reader to leave this district in the south-west, on which we have dwelled so long, and follow us to the Western Dales, round the head of Hvammsfirth. Here a woman, and a mighty woman, had been the first settler. This was Aud the deeply wealthy, who, when her son Thorstein the red was slain by the Scots, over a portion of whose country he had been king, set sail for Iceland, took all the Dale country at the top of Hvammsfirth, and set up her abode at Hvamm. She was old when she came, but still lived several years, and died on the wedding-day of the youngest of her grandchildren, whom she had brought out with her after their father's death. This was about 908-10. She married one named Thorgerda soon after she came out to Kolli, a Norwegian, who was called Dalakol or Dale-Kolli, and his son was Hauskuld. On Kol li's death, Thorgerda, who seems to have been of a roving turn like her grandmother, went abroad to Norway, and there married Herjolf, by whom she had a son, Hrut, who was probably much younger than his half-brother, as we find him over living him many years.<a id="noteref-chief-settlers-6" href="#note-chief-settlers-6" epub:type="noteref"><sup>6</sup></a></p>
			<hr/>
			<section id="chief-settlers-endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Notes</h3>
				<p id="note-chief-settlers-1"><a href="#noteref-chief-settlers-1">1</a> Þjórsá ok Markarfljót.</p>
				<p id="note-chief-settlers-2"><a href="#noteref-chief-settlers-2">2</a> It has been thought by some that Thverá did not exist in Njal's time, but it is plain from Landnáma, which mentions, Pt. 5,</p>
				<p id="note-chief-settlers-3"><a href="#noteref-chief-settlers-3">3</a> This narrative is taken from Landnáma, p. 5, ch. iii. and iv. It will be remarked, that in giving the genealogy of Rannveiga, Gunnar’s mother, Njála omits all notice of Sigmund, but says that she was the daughter of Sigfus, the son of Sighvat the red, who was slain at Sandhol Ferry. This is plainly wrong, for it was Sigmund, and not Sigfus, who was slain there, and Rannveiga was the sister of Mord and Sigfus, and therefore could not have been her brother’s child. There is, however, a difficulty to restoring Sigmund with Landnáma to the missing branch in the genealogy, because Sighvat the red only reached Iceland about the year 900. He then married Rannveiga (whom we may call the first, to distinguish her from Rannveiga the second, Gunnar’s mother), and as Mord was a grown man about 930, it would be almost impossible that Rannveiga should be his grandmother. Guðbrandr Vigfússon, in his excellent essay on the Chronology of the old Icelandic Sagas— “ Um Tímatal í Íslendinga Sögum i Fornöld ” (Safn Til Sögu Íslands gefið út af hinu Íslenzka Bókmentafélagi, Kaupmannahöfn, 1855)— is inclined to think that Sigmund was not the father of the children</p>
				<p id="note-chief-settlers-4"><a href="#noteref-chief-settlers-4">4</a> According to this genealogy Thorgeir Craggeir and Njal were brothers’ children, first cousins. One would almost suspect that a leaf had dropped off the family tree here between Holt-Thorir and Thorgeir Craggeir, for Thorgeir must have been at least thirty years younger than Njal. He was a famous man at the time of the Burning, for he had already done that daring deed of which Kari speaks, chap. 145, <abbr>vol. ii</abbr>. pp. 287; but he is not described as an elderly man. Njal, on the other hand, born about 930, must have been nearly if not quite 80 in 1011.</p>
				<p id="note-chief-settlers-5"><a href="#noteref-chief-settlers-5">5</a> Guðbrandr Vigfússon, Um Tímatal, pp. 293, makes Gizur out to have been thirty years younger than his sister.</p>
				<p id="note-chief-settlers-6"><a href="#noteref-chief-settlers-6">6</a> Hauskuld died, as we know from Njála, in 986 or thereabouts; but Hrut, who, in spite of his misfortune with Unna, had two other wives, one probably before, and the other after her, lived on till after the close of the century. Though it was not fated that he should have children by Unna, he had by his other wives sixteen sons and ten daughters; and once he rode to the Althing, as Laxdæla tells us, with fourteen full-grown sons at his back, and that was thought a grand sight. When he was over seventy, about 995, he slew a man named Eldgrim, and so kept up his fame as a good swordsman to the end of his life.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>