<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Additions and Corrections</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section epub:type="appendix">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Additions and Corrections</h2>
			</header>
			<p>Introduction, x. “The lions of the Acropolis.” This is incorrect. The lion on which a runic inscription is carved stood in the Piræus, not on the Acropolis. When the Venetians, under Francesco Morosini, took Athens in the year 1687, this lion, which is of colossal size, was carried away as a trophy; it now stands at the entrance to the Arsenal at Venice. The runes on it, which were first discovered by Åkerblad, a Swedish traveller, at the end of the last century, have recently been deciphered and published from photographic copies, together with a very able explanation by the distinguished Secretary of the Kongelige Nordiske Oldskrift-Selskab, M. C. C. Rafn, who has shown that the inscription records the capture of the Piræus by no less a person than King Harold Hardráda, who, before he mounted the throne of Norway, was captain of the Varangians at Constantinople. See Antiquarisk Tidsskrift, 1855-57. Kbh., 1857. “En Nordisk Runeindskrift i Piræus, med Forklaring af C. C. Rafn.”</p>
			<p>P. xxxiii, note, last line, for “mother” read “wife.”</p>
			<p>P. lxxvii. In the Introduction the account of Guðbrandr Vigfússon (Timatal, p. 286) has been followed as to the relationship which existed between Asgerda, Njak, and Thorgeir Craggeir. That account is based on the following passages from Landuáma, p. 279, Kph., 1843 :—“Ofeig was the name of a man of rank in Ronisdale province; he had to wife Asgerda, the daughter of Ask the silent. Ofeig fell out with King Harold Fairhair, and busked him for an Iceland voyage; but just as he was “boun,” king Harold sent men to him, and his life was taken; but Asgerda fared out to Iceland with their children, and along with her Thorolf, her base-born brother. Asgerda took land between Selialandsmull and Markfleet, and all Langaness up as far as Ioldustone (or Auldustone) and set up her abode to the north in</p>
			<p>Kataness. The children of Ofeig and Asgerda were Thorgeir Gollnir and Thorstein bottle-beard, Thorbjörn the quiet and Alof Ellidashield, whom Thorberg Cornmull had to wife. . . . Thorolf, the brother of Asgerda, took land at her counsel to the west of the Fleet between the two Deildarwaters, and dwelt at Thorolf'sfell ; there he reared Thorgeir Gollnir, Asgerda's son, who dweltthere afterwards ; his son (Thorgeir's) was Njal, who was burntinside his house.&quot; A little earlier in the same chapter, p. 278, occurs the following passage :—&quot; Thorgeir of Hordaland, the sonof Bard Minglehorn, fared from Viggjar in Dron theim to Iceland. He bought land from Asgeir fishhook between Lambfellswaterand Ersewater, and set up his abode at Holt. A few winters (years) after he got Asgerda to wife, the daughter of Ask thesilent, and their sons were Thorgrim the big and Holt-Thorir, the father of Thorleif crow and Craggeir.&quot; According to thesestatements, Thorgeir Gollnir and Holt-Thorir would have beenhalf-brothers by the same mother, Asgerda, who would have been Njal's grandmother, while Njal and Thorgeir Craggeir wouldhave been first cousins. On the other hand, nothing can be more positive than thestatement of our Saga, that Asgerda, the daughter of Lord Ar thesilent, was Njal's mother, that Thorgeir Gelling or Gollnir was Njal's father, and that another son of Asgerda's was Holt-Thorir, the father of Thorgeir crow and Craggeir. By this account Njaland Thorgeir Craggeir would have stood in the relation of uncleand nephew, and it is remarkable that Thorgeir Craggeir himself (II., p. 190) calls Njal his father's brother, and Njal's sonshis cousins. In spite of Landnáma we think that the account in the Saga, so far as the story itself is concerned, is the more reasonable of the two statements, especially as, if Njal and Thorgeir Craggeir were really first cousins, the one must have been nearlyforty years older than the other ; but if they are regarded asuncle and nephew, it would seem perfectly natural that a nephewof forty should be the avenger of an uncle of eighty.</p>
			<p>According to Landnáma. 1st Husband, OFEIG ASGERDA = 2d Husband, THORGEIR of Hordaland THORGEIR GOLLNIR HOLT-THORIR NJAL. THORGEIR-CRAGGEIR.</p>
			<p>According to the Saga. SKARPHEDINN, etc. THORGEIR CRAGGEIR, etc.</p>
			<p>P. cxiv. For “ máttmáll” read “ náttmál.”</p>
			<p>Saga I. P. 1, note, for “ Olaf” read “ Oleif.” Pp. 3, 4. “ High Court.” This court is the same as “ Lögretta” or “ Court of Laws.” 14. According to Munch, NH. I. 755, Earl Arnvid fled from Vermeland and not from Jemtland. 29. For “ Reykriverdale,” in this and other places read “ Reykiardale.” 47. “ For one oath shall not become all oaths,” a proverbtaken from the Law, and meaning “ there is an exception to every rule.” Comp. Sveinbjörn Egilsson Dict. sub voce eiðr. 75. For “ Oxwater” read “ Axewater.” 80. The “ his” in the passage “ His mother’s name,” etc. refers to Asgrim Ellidagrim’s son, not to Ellidagrim. 83. Biarmaland, the reference to the foot-note is wanting. 91. “ Hehnrod” in the verses is a periphrasis for a sword. 102. “ Thorkatla Asgrim Ellidagrim’s son’s daughter.” The Saga sometimes calls this woman Thorkatla and sometimes Thorhalla, though more often the latter. Guð- brandr Vigfússon, Tímatal, doubts whether Helgi wasmarried at this time, and suggests that this might be Thorkatla Asgrim’s wife and not Thorhalla his daughter. Comp. Introduction, p. lxxxvi. 147. “ Thord Longbeard.” In another place (see p. 80) the Saga speaks of Thord as though he were Skeggi’s son ; here “ Skeggi the bearded,” or “ Longbeard,” is usedas a nickname, and there is a link less in the genealogy. 151. “ The Side.” The description of “ the Side” in the noteis not exact. “ The Side” was the Hillside in Skaptarfell’s Sýsla between the river Skaptá and Skaptarfell ; beyond the river, between it and the sea was Medalland (Middleland).</p>
			<p>159. “Hallkell, thy grandfather, who was the greatest ofchampions.” This Hallkell was the half-brother of Kettlebjörn the old. He slew Grim of Grimsness andtook his landnám. Comp. Introduction, p. lxxix. P. 177. “Gunnar leapt off his horse,” rather “slipped off hishorse.” Comp. p. 236. 196. For “Knafaholes” read “Knafahills” here and in theother passages in which the name occurs. 200. For “holes” read “hills.” 204. For “Gunner” read “Gunnar.” 235. For “Olof Kettle’s son” read “Olaf Kettle’s son.” 248. For “Horsebeck ” read “Hestbeck.”</p>
			<h3>VOL. II.</h3>
			<p>P. 20. In the last line, for “room” read “hall.” 22. “Either that I will tell where thou art.” By so doing, according to legal custom, Hrapp would have clearedhimself of his own outlawry. 24. “Thorgerda Shrinebride.” This divinity was the daughter of Helgi or Haleygr, a mythical king of Halogaland or Helgeland. This province, the name of whichmeans “The Holy Land,” seems to have been theseat of a peculiar worship. (Comp. Völsapáttr, published by Guðbrandr Vigfússon, together with Bár- ðar Saga Snaefellsáss, and other romantic pieces, Kph. 1860). Thorgerda, who was also called “Holgabrud” or “the Bride of Helgeland, was worshipped, togetherwith her sister Irpa (the fair), by the families whichsprang from Helgeland. Earl Hacon’s father Sigurdwas so descended. Her father’s name occurs in our Saga, Vol. ii. p. 115, in the genealogy of Gudmund thepowerful. Comp. Færeyinga Saga, ch. 23, where anaccount of Thorgerda sitting in Earl Hacon’s shrine at Ladir will be found. It was a kerchief or snood, “falld,” and not a wimple that she had on her head. 50. “Listeners do not often hear good of themselves,” theliteral meaning of the original is rather “many areworse spoken of than they would choose.” 56. “Twelve ells, about twenty-four feet,” etc. This would</p>
			<p>be according to the length of the present Norse ell, but there is reason to believe that the old Norse ellwas not more than an English foot and a half. Thewidth of Skarphedinn’s leap would therefore be eighteenfeet. Comp. Appendix, II. 358 and 398. 81. “But still ye run great risk,” etc. These words of Flosiseem rather to allude to the danger which existedbetween Hauskuld’s family and Njal’s, on account of Thrain’s slaying. 92. “Torch,” Skriðljós, perhaps more probably means alantern. Comp., Bergbúa Þáttr, Bárðar Saga Snæ- fellsáss, p. 124, Kph., 1860. 105. “A dark horse.” The Icelandic, “vanfoli,” or “váfoli,” answers exactly to this sporting term. The horse wasfour years old, but Mord called it an untried foal. 105. “Folkmote.” This was the “Leið,” or “Leet,” in theautumn. 121. Chap. cxv. In this chapter, the Saga writer seems tohave applied the arrangement of the Icelandic Skáli in the twelfth or thirteenth century to the time of Njal. The “sitting-room,” or “stof a,” into which Flosi went, was on the dais or “þverpallr,” and by the description which follows of Hildigunna’s goingbackwards and forwards to the “hall,” it is clear that the writer supposed that the þverpallr, at the easternend of the Skáli or hall, was cut off from the body of the hall; but we know that this was not the case in the tenth century. Flosi might have had a high seatset for him on the dais, but that would only have beenon a raised platform at the eastern end, but not in aseparate room cut off from the rest of the hall. Inthe hall of such a man as Hauskuld, there would, wemay be sure, have been ample room for Hildigunna to</p>
			<p>go to and fro, without being observed. Comp. Introduction, xcix, c. P. 124. “ Women’s counsel is ever cruel,” “ Köld eru kvennaráð,” literally “ cold,” or “ cold-blooded are women’s redes.” 124. “ Holtford,” on Thurso-water. 139. Adalsyssla, Icel. Adalsýsla, the great or main provinceor government. According to Munch in Fagrskinna, see Glossary, it answers to the modern Esthonia. 152. For “ Hill of Laws” read “ Court of Laws.” 153. When it is said that Flosi and the sons of Sigfus came “ from the east” from their booths to the Court of Laws, and that Njal and his sons came “ from thewest,” this is another proof that Flosi’s booth or Byrgir’sbooth was on the east side of Axewater. Comp. Introduction cxxx, foll. 164. “ And so fares it with Flosi’s redes As this flaming brand flies ;” Sveinbjörn, Egilsson Dict., under “ Kefli,” interpretsthese lines “ ratio Flosii similis est volubili cylindro ;” “ Flosi’s redes are like a rolling wheel orroller ;” and he compares with them the maxim in Pythagoras—“ ὡς δὲ κύλινδροι | ἄλλοτ’ ἐπ’ ἄλλα φέρον- ται.” The translator has, however, thought it morenatural to compare Flosi’s swift and burning counselwith the flaming firebrand which the apparition hurledtowards the spot where the burning of Njal and hissons took place. 185. The Rangriver, so often mentioned in the Saga, is theeastern branch of the river, which now runs in twostreams. This eastern branch rushes between steepscarped banks, across which it is easy to converse whenit is quite impossible to pass it. 297. “ In unclipped coin ;” perhaps this merely means “ without any deduction.”</p>
			<p>P. 314. “The Hundred.” This is the fruitful “Hèrað” or “District,” which since Njal’s time has been so cruellydevastated by eruptions from the Skapta-Jokul. 322. “Swanlauga.” Unless this is another name for the samewoman, Earl Gilli must have married two daughters of Earl Sigurd. Comp. above, p. 40, where it is said that Earl Sigurd gave his sister Nereida to Earl Gilli. 323. “Connaught,” a mistake of the Saga for Kincora. Comp. 336. “’Tis fittest that the beggar should bear the bag.” Foran older form of this proverb see Maurer Bek. des 347. For “sitting-room” read “hall.” 348. For “room” read “hall.”</p>
			<h3>THE END.</h3>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
