<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Money and Currency in the Tenth Century</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="appendix-13" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Money and Currency in the Tenth Century</h2>
			<p>The question of money and currency in Iceland, in the tenth century, is one of great difficulty, that difficulty being much increased by the fact that the sums and proportions mentioned in the Sagas and Laws relate to a period at which the currency and the standards of the tenth century had undergone great changes. In a word, the writers apply the currency and standards of their own age to one which in those respects was widely different. The following are the results of much inquiry into the matter. In early times there were two standards of value—measure, and weight, and two materials, two essays by Petersen in the Annaler for Nor disk Oldkyndighed, who thinks it probable that she died in Jutland, and that the body found was possibly hers. See on the other hand, Worsaae, Hist. Tidskrift, iii. p. 244-292. On the whole it was a very pretty quarrel. It is remarkable, however, that in the speech put into King Olaf Tryggvi's son's mouth in the Flatey book, when converting Earl Sigurd, he only speaks of “ most of Gunnhillda's sons having been cut off (afráðnir) though Ragnhilda was still alive.” Now, it would seem probable that the zealous king, had the woman who slew his father met with such a just retribution, would scarcely have failed to make a point of her fate in his “ long and able speech,” by mentioning her along with her sons, and so alluding to the manner of her death.</p>
			<p>to which those standards were adjusted—wadmal<a id="noteref-money-currency-1" href="#note-money-currency-1" epub:type="noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> or woollen cloth for measure, and silver for weight. 1. In the standard of woollen or measure, the unity was the ell, and its multiples up to a hundred. This hundred being the long hundred of twelve tens, or 120.<a id="noteref-money-currency-2" href="#note-money-currency-2" epub:type="noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> This standard, which was called that of measure or tale, was the currency of the island in old times, and still exists in Iceland as the national currency (landaurar, talið) at the present day. All landed property, and goods and chattels are valued in it; and when it is said that such and such a bit of land, or such a herd of cattle, or so much furniture are worth 20, 60, or 80 hundreds, the meaning of the words, and the value of the property, is as well understood as both would have been in Njal’s time. 2. In the standard of weight or silver, the unity was the ounce, or eyrir (pl. aurar), eight of which made the mark (mörk) or pound. But as time went on, these two standards were confounded together, and though ells and hundreds belonged originally strictly to the woollen standard, or that of measure alone, and ounces (aurar), and marks (mörk) to that of weight alone, men began to speak of hundreds of weighed silver, and of measured or reckoned ounces and marks of woollen. So that, though it was etymologically right only to talk of weighed marks, and measured or reckoned hundreds, and etymologically wrong to talk of weighed hundreds and measured or reckoned marks, still custom and convenience soon broke through etymological rules, and thus we find ounces and marks used to express the country currency by measure and tale, and ells and hundreds weighed to express the silver standard. This confusion between ounces and marks by tale, and ells and hundreds by weight, was worse confounded by the introduction, at a very early time, of foreign minted silver or coin, which of course would be reckoned by tale. In the tenth century there seems to have been but one such coin, the penning, or Anglo- Saxon penny, of which vast numbers found their way to the north by trade and war.<a id="noteref-money-currency-3" href="#note-money-currency-3" epub:type="noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> It is improbable that there were such coins at the period of which we write as marks or ounces, but that, when those sums are mentioned, they were weighed or made up by tale from the coins which we have mentioned. But in those days silver by tale and silver by weight were one and the same thing. Having thus explained the two standards of weight and tale, and shown how they became confounded in terms, while remaining distinct in fact, we proceed to inquire, what proportion the woollen currency by tale bore to the silver currency by weight. How did the hundred ells by tale stand with regard to the hundred in silver by weight. This naturally varied at different times, but about the year 1000 the proportion was as four to one. According to Grágás four hundreds in woollen, and twenty yards as margin, were then equal to one hundred in silver, and the passage is so remarkable, that it is worth quotation at length. It is of Hacon Athelstane’s foster-child, who died 960; in fact, it is a question whether there were any coins struck in his reign at all, for one which has been found bearing the name “ Hacon ” may be ascribed to Earl Hacon. In any case, according to Munch, the number of Norwegian coins in circulation, if any existed at all, must have been very few, while the quantity of Anglo-Saxon coins found all over the north shews that they must have passed current everywhere. In later times the “ örtug,” a Norwegian coin, is spoken of as well as the “ penning:” the eyrir or ounce contained three örtugs.</p>
			<p>there said, sect. 245, ed. Kbh. 1856, “At that time, when Christianity came out hither to Iceland, silver was current in all great dealings. It was to be pale silver, and must stand cutting, and be most part silver, and if it were coined, so coined that sixty<a id="noteref-money-currency-4" href="#note-money-currency-4" epub:type="noteref"><sup>4</sup></a> pennies made an ounce weighed, and then silver by tale and silver by weight was all one. A hundred in silver was then tenth part of an eyrir.” Again—“Lögsilfr et forna þat er x penningar göra eyri.”—Grág. II. 188, 4to. “The old law-silver, of which ten pennies make an ounce.” But here again a puzzling qualification is added—“Oc meir se silfrslit á en messingar, oc þoli scor, oc se jamt utan sem innan.” “And which has more the hue of silver than of latten, and which will bear cutting, and is alike outside and inside.” In all such qualifying expressions in MS. of the thirteenth century, as to the purity of silver, one cannot help thinking that the scribe, when speaking of the old standard silver, applies to it the legal stipulations required for the “lög-silfr” or “law-silver” of his own, and that a much later, day. This “bleikt silfr,” or “gangsilfr,” or “lögsilfr,” this “pale,” or “current,” or “lawful silver,” in which the silver just turned the scale over the alloy, which was more of a silvern than a brazen hue, and which was even in colour and fibre throughout, was the legal silver currency of the thirteenth century, and may be reckoned as worth 2s. 6d. an ounce. Opposed to it, as superior in purity, was “skírt silfr,” or “brendt silfr,” “pure silver” or “burnt silver;” and as inferior in purity, grásilfr or blásilfr, “gray” or “blue silver.” We know from Grágás (II. 193, 8vo), that early in the thirteenth century a mark of this pure or burnt silver was worth an ounce of gold “that would stand the fire,” and these were each worth sixty ounces of law silver; in other words, the proportion between pure silver and law silver was then almost eight to one, and the proportion between pure or burnt silver and gold was exactly as eight to one, since there were eight ounces or eyrir in every pound or mark. As for “gray silver” or “blue silver,” we are told by a MS. in the Arna-Magnæan Library at Copenhagen, 732, p. 16, that it was “thirty times less valuable than gold.” All these facts point to reckoned the same as four hundreds and twenty<a id="noteref-money-currency-5" href="#note-money-currency-5" epub:type="noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> ells of wadmal, and then the ounce (of silver) was worth half a mark of wadmal.”</p>
			<p>It now remains to inquire into the value of these standards respectively in English money.<a id="noteref-money-currency-6" href="#note-money-currency-6" epub:type="noteref"><sup>6</sup></a> It appears, a rapid depreciation of the silver standard, attended, as we shall see, by a proportionate rise in the woollen currency. The ounce of silver, which, at the calculation of 4s. 6d. to the eyrir, would have been worth twenty-five ells in the tenth century, was only worth six in the thirteenth. Thus Grágás II. 192, 8vo.—“Þat er fiarlag at Alt hings male at vi alnir vaðmáls gilldz nytz oc onotit scolo vera í eyre.” “This is the scale of goods by the custom (or decree) of the Althing, that six ells of good new and unworn wadmal shall be worth an eyrir.” Later still, there appears to have been further depreciation, if we may judge from the expressions “þriggja alna eyrir,” which seems to mean an ounce in which the silver was only worth three ells. But these questions of the different proportions of the wadmal currency in the thirteenth century are of immense difficulty, and we gladly leave them to return to an earlier age.</p>
			<p>from the most reliable inquiries, that the value of the Norwegian eyrir or ounce which was the unit of the silver standard was 4s. 6d., from which it follows that the penny, of which there were to be twenty in an ounce weighed, would be worth nearly twopence three farthings sterling. As there were eight ounces in a mark, the worth of that weight of silver would be thirty-six shillings. As the mark of wadmal was equal to a fourth part of the silver mark, its value would be nine shillings. With respect to the value of one hundred in silver, or four hundred and twenty ells in wadmal, the most reliable researches have shewn it to be equal to twenty ounces or aurar, or two marks and a half, and consequently its value in English money would be £4: 10s. for the silver hundred.</p>
			<p>These would be the values of the eyrir or ounce, mark, and hundred, supposing the purity of the silver to have been equal to that of our standard silver; and there is every reason to believe that this was the case</p>
			<p>The Anglo-Saxon ounce, which was no doubt the same as the old Tower ounce, weighed 450 grains Troy, and the old Cologne or German ounce weighed 451·38 grains Troy. This old Norwegian ounce of 412·58 grains Troy, as compared with the present Troy ounce of 480 grains, shews the value of the silver in the former to have been very nearly 4s. 6d., assuming the present price of standard silver to be 5s. 2d. an ounce.</p>
			<p>in the tenth century. In the first place, we are actually in a position to test the purity of the silver then current in the North. It was almost all English, and the researches of Ruding and others have proved that the Anglo-Saxon coins—however deficient some of them may have been in weight, partly from design and partly from the rude appliances of the Anglo-Saxon Mint—are in fact of the same purity as our sterling silver, and that our standard is in fact the Anglo-Saxon standard. In the next place, we know that Anglo-Saxon coins were carried to Iceland in large quantities. The penny which Grim Goat shoe got from every household for surveying the island, before the Althing was established in the year 929, was no doubt an English penny; the money which Egil brought back to Iceland after the Battle of Brunanburg was Anglo-Saxon money; and so, too, there is little doubt that the penny, or scatt-penny, which Eyvind Scald spoiler got, in the reign of Harold Grayfell, from every household in Iceland for his poem in praise of Icelanders, and which we are expressly told was equal to three weighed pennies of a later age, was an Anglo-Saxon penny.<a id="noteref-money-currency-7" href="#note-money-currency-7" epub:type="noteref"><sup>7</sup></a> For these reasons, both because we know the exact weight of silver in the old Norwegian ounce, and because we know that the silver of which it was ordinarily composed was pure, we are inclined to think that the values given above will be found to be correct. It is, however, very evident that the “pale (bleikt) silver” mentioned in the extract from Grágás, “which would bear cutting and be most part silver,” was considerably alloyed, and if the writer is actually describing the silver current in the year 1000, and not rather the gangsilfr or lögsilfr of his own day, then the silver of the tenth century must have been worth far less in English money. As it was to be “most part silver,” we may assume that the ounce of this “pale” silver, or law-silver, would be 2s. 6d., in which case the mark would have been worth only 20 shillings sterling, the mark of wadmal only 5 shillings, and the hundred in silver or four hundred and twenty ells in wadmal £2: 10s.</p>
			<p>In a tabular form the relative proportions of the two hundreds, as well as their values respectively in English money at 4s. 6d. and 2s. 6d. an ounce, would stand as follows:</p>
			<p>was written down, and that the old Anglo-Saxon penny was then worth three later pennies of the same weight, but each containing only a third of the pure silver in the old coin.</p>
			<p>| 100 (120) in Silver. | 100, 120+5<a id="noteref-money-currency-8" href="#note-money-currency-8" epub:type="noteref"><sup>8</sup></a> in Wadmal. | Mark Silver. | Mark Wadmal. | | | 125 ells = 22s. 6d. | oz., eyrir, silver. | oz., wadmal. | | | 5 ells = 10¾d. | 4s. 6d. | 1s. 1½d. |</p>
			<p>| 100 (120) in Silver. | 100 120 + 5 in Wadmal. | Mark Silver. | Mark Wadmal. | | £2: 10s. | 12s. 6d. | 20s. | 5s. | | | 125 ells = 12s. 6d. | oz., eyrir, silver. | oz., wadmal. | | | 5 ells = 6d. | 2s. 6d. | 7½d. |</p>
			<p>With regard to the relative value of these suns in the tenth century, it may occur to some readers that the proportion of four to one between the silver standard and the wadmal currency is too low, especially if we suppose that the silver of the tenth century was equal to our standard silver; but in making this comparison, it must be remembered that in the tenth century the precious metals were more abundant and in less demand than they were in succeeding centuries. There was less coining and more barter, less want of money as a circulating medium, and more of it hoarded. Commerce and Viking cruizes brought a rich store of silver into the north, which lay idle except when its owner was called on to complete a large bargain, or to pay some blood-fine at the bidding of the law. There was then no difference, as we have seen from Grágás, between silver by tale and silver by weight, but a century or two after, when Viking voyages had almost ceased, and the supply of silver into the North was cut off, there was a very great difference between sums paid in coin which were clipped and debased, and so depreciated, and payments by weight in pure silver.<a id="noteref-money-currency-9" href="#note-money-currency-9" epub:type="noteref"><sup>9</sup></a> In the tenth century, we have seen that the value of the eyrir or silver ounce would be twenty-five ells of wadmal, but in later times, as it became debased, it was only worth six, and later still, only three ells of the woollen currency. Then arose that distinction, which we are expressly warned by our authorities not to accept as existing in earlier times; then it was that silver by tale and silver by weight became two different things. Then it is that we first hear of örtugs as well as pennies, and of marks and ounces and örtugs by weight, which were six times as valuable as the same sums by tale. It is very doubtful whether these sums by tale are another way of expressing the old proportion between the silver and woollen him as though the silver in which they had been paid was not pure; so he tossed it up with his other hand, and down fell all the silver on the straw.&quot; Fornm. S. vi. 243. This Haldor was son of our friend Snorri the priest. He had been King Harold's companion in Constantinople; and he now complained so bitterly that he could not get his pay without cheating, that, though the rest of the king's men were content with the debased coin, Harold had to give Haldor twelve ounces of &quot; burnt silver,&quot; with which he was content. It may be inferred from this passage, that up to that time the silver current in the north had been pure. In fact, just when the kings in the north began to coin, the source whence they had drawn their supplies of the precious metals was stopped. England and the west ceased to be the battlefield of the North men, and the value of silver rose rapidly. With the rise came the usual arts of a scanty exchequer—clipping and debasement of the standard, followed as certainly by a corresponding rise in the necessaries of life.</p>
			<p>standards, or whether they represent a further depreciation of the silver currency intercalated as it were between the lögsilfr, which in that case would be equivalent to the weighed currency, and the landaurar or woollen standard. But this again is a question which does not so much concern us in the tenth century, and which we may leave with the earnest wish, that some Icelander fitted for the task may yet unravel this tangled web.<a id="noteref-money-currency-11" href="#note-money-currency-11" epub:type="noteref"><sup>11</sup></a></p>
			<p>If we apply the data at which we have arrived to our Saga, we shall find that while all the fines, bót, in suits are in the standard of silver, whether by weight or in coin, all other transactions within the country are in the woollen or national currency. Thus when Mord pays</p>
			<p>Hrut sixty hundreds as her portion, that means the sixty hundreds in wadmal, which would be a great portion as compared with Hrut’s landed property and his ship.<a id="noteref-money-currency-12" href="#note-money-currency-12" epub:type="noteref"><sup>12</sup></a> Again, when Flosi bargains with the Easterling for his ship, and had over and above 20 hundreds in wares, those were hundreds in wadmal and not in silver. When Flosi gave Eyjolf the gold ring which was worth twelve hundreds in russet stuff,<a id="noteref-money-currency-13" href="#note-money-currency-13" epub:type="noteref"><sup>13</sup></a> equal to 288 ounces in though this russet stuff was reckoned as dearer than the ordinary wadmal. According to Grágás (II. 193, 8vo.), 5 ells of it went for the eyrir or ounce when 6 of the ordinary wadmal went for that sum. If the ounce be reckoned at 4s. 6d., the ring would have been worth £64: 16s. in our money, if at 2s. 6d., £36. With regard to the bót or compensation for manslaughter, there can be no doubt that the oldest way of paying it was by ring-tale (at baugatali), and that those blood-fines were connected in some way with the rings used in religious worship. It seems to be universally agreed, that in the graduated scale of those rings mentioned in Grágás—þrímerkingr<a id="noteref-money-currency-14" href="#note-money-currency-14" epub:type="noteref"><sup>14</sup></a> (three the weights and measures in those islands followed the standards of the mother country, thus the “ure” or “ore” in Orkney is only another form of “eyrir.” It too was the 8th part of a mark, and was the fundamental unit of weight and value in Orkney. In Shetland we find the cuttel or cut ell, as the fundamental unit, six of which went to the “ure,” this cut ell being the ell of wadmal. In fact, the unity in Orkney began one step higher up, while in Shetland the old woollen currency of six ells to the “ure” or “eyrir” was retained.—See Mr. Balfour’s “Oppress ions in Orkney and Zetland.” Edinburgh, 1859. Glossary sub voc. “ure,” “mark,” and “cuttel.” marks) = 24 oz., tvítugauri = 20 oz., tvímerkíngr (two marks) = 16 oz., and tólfeyringr 12 oz., the 2d of 20 oz. or two marks and a half in silver, was equivalent to a hundred in silver. The rate of these compensations varied in different times, but in the tenth century, twelve ounces in silver, or a silver ring of that weight, was reckoned the fitting compensation for the loss of a thrall, and accordingly, we find that price paid more than once for thralls in our Saga. At the same period, one hundred in silver was the price of a freeman who had no fixed abode of his own, and lived at service in another freeman’s house. Thus, we find this sum paid in our Saga for Atli, whose bargain, on remaining in Njal’s service had been, that if slain he should not be paid for as a thrall. A like amount was paid for Brynjolf the unruly, and in both instances it is added that that price was the blood-fine for a freeman. So also in the case of Thord Freedman’s son, Njal tells his sons that he had been paid for at the rate of two men, the price having been two hundreds in silver. But, at the same period, there can be no doubt, that the common price for a freeman who had a house and land of his own was two hundreds in silver, and in the case of Thorwald, of Lightwater a fee of three marks to utter the law. And finally, Mord Valgard’s son made himself liable to a fine of three marks, for wrongly summoning the neighbours on the inquest.</p>
			<p>Halgerda’s first husband, we are expressly told that two hundreds in silver were reckoned “ a good price for a man.” This price was paid by Hauskuld for the slaying of Thorwald, as well as in several other cases in our Saga. When the man slain was of great rank or worth, a higher price was put on him. Thus Hauskuld, Thrain’s son, was to have three times the ordinary price, or six hundreds in silver, put upon him, and when all the body of freemen at the Althing contributed to pay an atonement for Ljot, Hall of the Side’s son, the sum collected amounted to no less than 8 hundreds in silver, or four times the common price. With regard to Njal, though the Saga says that he was paid for with a threefold price, this in all probability means that his blood-fine was three hundreds. Perhaps the amount of money to be collected in all, when so many other blood-fines had to be paid at the same time, may have helped to lower his price.<a id="noteref-money-currency-15" href="#note-money-currency-15" epub:type="noteref"><sup>15</sup></a> But in all these sums we think we see a fresh proof that the hundred in Njal's time was £4: 10s., rather than £2: 10s. A man of Njal's worth was surely worth £13: 10s., and £7: 10s. would have been too little for him.<a id="noteref-money-currency-16" href="#note-money-currency-16" epub:type="noteref"><sup>16</sup></a> We may fairly conclude, that when there was so much money in the island, and when, in every other relation of life, the freeman was valued so highly, the price paid to his family for his loss would have been on the higher rather than on the lower scale.</p>
			<p>In conclusion, we may briefly mention the darkest side of this whole inquiry. We have made out the proportion between the silver and the woollen standards, and shown that they stood in the relation of four to one in the tenth century; but unless we can ascertain the proportion in which the woollen standard stood to the necessaries of life at the same date, we shall be unable to fix the true value of the silver standard. Absolutely and intrinsically the silver oz. was worth 4s. 6d., and relatively to the wadmal currency of the tenth century it was worth four times as much as the woollen oz., in which all the dealings of daily life were transacted. But relatively to the nineteenth century, or in other words, the amount of goods which could be bought in Iceland for 4s. 6d. in the tenth century, compared with what could be bought there for 4s. 6d. now, would depend entirely on the amount which could be bought then by the ounce of wadmal;—whatever that might be, four times that amount could be had for the silver ounce. On this point, however, our authorities afford us little information, and we can only conjecture, that the oz. of wadmal in those days was worth about four or five times as much as it is now. A cow in Iceland at the present day is worth one hundred in wadmal, or £1: 2: 6, and six wethers may be bought for the same sum. In earlier times, no doubt, four or five cows might have been bought for the same sum, and we shall probably not be wrong if we conclude, that the value of money in Iceland in the tenth century, as compared with what it is now, would be about 8 or 9 to 1, and that the threefold blood-fine which was paid for Njal would have been about equal to £100<a id="noteref-money-currency-17" href="#note-money-currency-17" epub:type="noteref"><sup>17</sup></a> at the present day. A sum certainly not too great for one of the wisest and most virtuous men which that island has ever reared.</p>
			<hr/>
			<section id="money-currency-endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Notes</h3>
				<p id="note-money-currency-1"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-1">1</a> Icel. vaðmál. The word is still alive in Orkney and Shet- land; see Jamieson’s Dict. sub voc. “ vadmell” and “ wadmaal.” It was also known, according to Grose, in some parts of England as “ woadmel.”</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-2"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-2">2</a> Wherever the figure C for hundred occurs in the Sagas, this invariably means the long hundred of twelve tens (tólfrætt); tíu tíu is ased to express ten tens. Guðbrandr Vigfússon thinks that the old Icelandic ell was only half the length of the English ell of three feet, and he draws this inference from the fact, that English yard-wide cloths and stuffs are called two ells (tvíelnt). This, per- haps, is scarcely sufficient evidence as to the old ell; but if it be cor- rect, Skarphedinn’s leap across Markfleet shrinks from 24 to 18 feet.</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-3"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-3">3</a> According to Munch N. H. I. 799, it is doubtful whether there was any coin struck in Norway before the end of the reign</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-4"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-4">4</a> This is probably an error for twenty. The editor of the new edition of Grágás remarks, in a note, that the scribe seems to have written two x’s, which were afterwards altered to lx, The ounce in early times would have been coined into twenty Anglo-Saxon pennies; but when the standard was debased, as it was when this MS. of Grágás was written, it would have been coined into sixty pence. The scribe, in copying an older MS., first wrote the xx as it stood in the original, and then altered the sum to suit the standard of his own time. There can be no doubt that in the thirteenth century sixty pennies went to the eyrir. Thus Snorro Sturla’s son, in the Heimskringla, speaking of St. Olaf’s attempt to tax the Icelanders—“Penning . . . þann er x væri fyrir alin vaðmáls.” “A penny, ten of which would go for an ell of wadmal;” as in Snorro’s time it is certain that six ells of wadmal went to the ounce, there would be sixty pennies in the ounce. At the same time the New Gula Thing’s code in Norway speaks of thirty pennies to the ounce. “En xxx peninga skal eyri hvern, hvárt sem gengr vegit eða talt.”—N. G. L. 1., 225. “But thirty pennies shall be in every eyrir, whether it be by weight or by tale.” It is very remarkable that Grágás speaks in two places of x pennies only as going to the eyrir, and that it calls silver of this kind “the old law-silver.” “Penning skal hann gefa goða þeim er hann leiðir í lög, þat skal hinn tíundi hlutr eyris vera.”—Gr. I., 357, 4to. “He (the thrall that is made free) shall give a penny to the priest who brings him into the law (who admits him to legal rights), that shall be the</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-5"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-5">5</a> These twenty ells were a margin or maketale, given over and above the proper quantity. They answer to the extra 6d. in the pound which was paid into the early English Exchequer when payments were made by weight (ad scalem), and answered to the Trebuchet in France, as so much thrown in to turn the scale. See Madox Hist. Excheq.; and Thomas, “The Ancient Exchequer of England,” p. 25.</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-6"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-6">6</a> The researches of M. C. A. Holmboe (De priscâ re Mone- tariâ Novegiæ Christ. 1844, p. 3. Comp. The Numismatic Chronicle, 1857, pp. 149-50) have shewn that the weight of the Norwegian eyrir or ounce was equal to 412·58 grains Troy.</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-7"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-7">7</a> When it is said that this scatt-penny equalled three weighed pennies, this is another proof that the standard had been debased at the time when the account of the gift to Eyvind</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-8"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-8">8</a> This 5 ells is the fourth part of the 20 ells of margin.</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-9"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-9">9</a> It is curious that the first of the kings who ruled in Eng- land, who gave systematically bad weight, was Canute.† This would be between 1017-36. The theoretical weight of the Anglo Saxon penny should be about 22 grains, and Ethelred the unready not only gave that amount, but more, some of his coins weighing as much as 26 grains. Canute’s, on the other hand, rarely exceed 16 grains, and in one instance fall as low as 13; still the silver was pure. We may infer from the following passage in the Saga of Harold the stern, who died A.D. 1066, that, up to his time, the coinage in Norway had not been debased. “ But when the eight day of Yule came, then their pay was given to the king’s men. That silver was called ‘ Harold’s coin,’ it was the more part copper. But when Haldor took his pay, he put it into the skirt of his cloak and looked at it, and it seemed to</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-10"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-10">10</a> This fact has been pointed out to the translator by his friend Mr. John Evans, F.S.A., of Nash Mills, whose authority on all matters relating to British and Anglo-Saxon coins is unquestionable.</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-11"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-11">11</a> The following table will shew the relation of these two silver standards, as well as of the woollen currency or landaurar in the thirteenth century, when the standard of six ells to the silver ounce or eyrir was current. | Marks. | Marks. | Oz. | Örtug. | Oz. | Örtug. | Ells. | | (Mörk) | (Merkur) | (Aurar) | (Ortngar) | (Aurar) | (Ortugar) | (Alnir) of | | weighed | by tale | weighed | weighed | by tale | by tale | Wadmall, | | (vegin.) | (taldir.) | (vegnir.) | (vegnar.) | (taldir.) | (taldar.) | (vadmals.) |</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-12"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-12">12</a> Guðbrandr Vigfússon informs me that Kamness and Hrutstede are now valued at thirty-six, or nineteen, hundreds by the old and new Icelandic valuations respectively (see Skýrslur um Landshagi á Íslandi, I., 694, 5). It is plain that Unna’s portion was reckoned in the wadmal currency from Mord’s words afterwards with regard to Mord’s property in Norway, which was worth a hundred (120) marks. When Mord calls that much goods or money compared with what his daughter would have from him, he means, in fact, to say that his daughter’s portion, which was sixty hundreds in woollen, was little compared with this Norway inheritance of 120 marks by weight. If Unna’s portion had been sixty hundreds by weight or in silver, each worth two marks and a half, it would have been much more than a hundred marks in silver, and Mord could not have spoken of it as a small sum compared with Hrut’s inheritance.</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-13"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-13">13</a> In Icelandic Mórendr, neut. mórendt; and modern Ice- landic móraudr, neut. mórautt. No one who has been in Shet- land can be in doubt as to the colour, for there he will find “moratt” or “morutt” everywhere used for the russet wool, which is the natural colour of so many of the fleeces in those islands. It is remarkable as showing the close connection which was kept up between Norway and Orkney and Shetland, that</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-14"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-14">14</a> This ring or sum of three marks runs throughout the Saga. Thus, when Mord reclaims Unna’s dower from Hrut, he couples his demand with a fine of three marks. Again Otkell and Skam- kell give Mord three marks for his help in finding out Hall- gerda’s theft. So again Hall of the Side gave Thorgeir the Priest</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-15"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-15">15</a> It is evident that throughout the Saga there is a doubt on the writer’s mind whether the blood-fine in the tenth century was one, or two hundreds, in silver. Though in one place we are told that two hundreds were then thought a good price for a man, in another Njal tells his sons that Gunnar, who had just paid him two hundreds in silver, had atoned for the foster-father, Thord Freedman’s son, as for two men. In the twelfth and thir- teenth centuries the number of hundreds paid was much higher.</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-16"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-16">16</a> Kormak, the passionate lover, valued Steingerda dearer; each of her eyes was worth three hundreds, her hair five hundreds, but all Steingerda was worth England, Ireland, Hunland, Den- mark, and Iceland.</p>
				<p id="note-money-currency-17"><a href="#noteref-money-currency-17">17</a> If his fine was three times the sum often paid for freemen of position, or six hundreds, this amount would of course be doubled.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>