<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Sea-Roving and the Viking Spirit</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="appendix-12" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Sea-Roving and the Viking Spirit</h2>
			<p class="continued">quite to my mind; I will now make that clear to the shipmasters and all the crews, that each man shall busk him in his room, and arm himself as he best can; after that we will row up to them, but if they are Christian chapmen, then it will be in our power to make peace with them; but if they are heathen, as I feel sure they are, then Almighty God will yield us that mercy that we may win the victory over them. But of the war-spoil which we get there, we shall give the fiftieth penny to poor men.’ After that men got out their arms and heightened the bulwarks of their ships, and made themselves ready according to the means which they had at hand; the earl settles where each of his ships should run in; and then they made an onslaught on her by rowing, and pulled up to her as briskly as they could. “ But when those who were on board the dromedary saw that ships were rowing up to them, and that men meant to make an onslaught on them, they took silken stuffs and costly goods and hung them out on the bulwarks, and then made great shoutings and hailings; and it seemed to the earl’s men as though they dared the North men to come on against them. Earl Rognvald laid his ship aft alongside the dromedary on the starboard, but Erling aft too on the larboard. John and Aslak, they laid their ships forward each on his own board, but the others amidships on both boards, and all the ships hugged her close, broadside to broadside. And when they came under the dromedary, her sides were so high out the water that they could not reach up with their weapons, but they [the foe] poured down blazing brimstone and flaming pitch over them; and it was as Erling guessed it would be, that the greatest weight of weapons fell out beyond the ships, and they had no need to shield themselves on that side. And when they made no way with their onslaught, the bishop shoved his ship off and two others, and they picked out and sent thither their bowmen, and they lay within shot, and shot thence at the dromedary, and then that onslaught was the hardest that was made; then those [on board the dromedary] got under cover, but thought little about what those were doing who had laid their ships under the dromedary. Earl Rognvald called out then to his men that they should take their axes and hew asunder the broadside of the dromedary in the parts where she was least iron-bound. But when the men in the other ships saw what the earl's men were about, they also took the like counsel. Now where Erling and his men had laid their ship a great anchor hung on the dromedary, and the fluke was hung by the crook over the bulwark, but the stock pointed down to Erling's ship. Audun the red was the name of Erling's bowman; he was lifted up on the anchor-stock, but after that he hauled up to him other men, so that they stood as thick as ever they could on the stock, and thence hewed at the sides as they best could, and that hewing was by far the highest up. And when they had hewn such a large door that they could go into the dromedary, they made ready to board, and the earl and his men got into the lower hold, but Erling and his men into the upper. And when both their bands had come up on the ship, there was a fight both great and hard. On board the dromedary were Saracens, what we call Mahomet's unbelievers. There were many blackamoors, and they made the hardest struggle. Erling got there a great wound on his neck near his shoulders as he sprang up into the dromedary; that healed so ill, that he bore his head on one side ever after; that was why he was called wry neck. And when they met, Earl Rognvald and Erling, the Saracens gave way before them and ran to the forepart of the ship, but the earl's men then boarded her one after another; then there were more of them, and they pressed the enemy hard. They saw that on board the dromedary was that one man who was both taller and fairer than the others; the North men held it to be the truth that that man must be their chief. Earl</p>
			<p>Rognvald said that they should not turn their weapons against him if they could take him in any other way; then they hemmed him in and bore him down with their shields, and so he was taken, and afterwards carried to the bishop's ship, and few men with him; but every other man's child they slew, and got much goods and many costly things. When they had ended the greatest part of their toil, then they sate down and rested themselves. Then the earl sang this:— ‘ Famous in victorious glory, Erling, brave in battle, went ’Gainst the galleon, tree of spears, When our banners dripped with blood; Low we laid the swarthy champions, Blood of foemen then was shed Far and wide, and soldiers brave Died their keen-edged faulchions red.’</p>
			<p>“ And again he sang— ‘ We make up our minds to win The galleon, slaughter this I call; At early dawn the warrior crew Reddened all their blades in gore; North and from the north the lady Of this shower of spears will hear Up to Nerbon; from our people Foemen suffered life-loss sad.’</p>
			<p>“ Men spoke of these tidings which had happened there, and then each spoke of what he thought he had seen; and men talked about who had been the first to board the ship, and could not agree about it. Then some said that it was foolish that they should not all have one story about these great tidings; and the end of it was that they agreed that Earl Rognvald should settle the dispute; and then they should all back what he said. Then the earl sang:— ‘ First upon the gloomy galleon Ruddy Audun went with eager Daring, and the warrior dauntless Soon dashed on to seize the spoil; There at last we reached to redden Weapons in our foemen’s blood; Mankind’s God hath ruled it so; On the planks fell corses black.’</p>
			<p>“ When they had stripped the dromedary, they put fire into her and burned her; and when that tall man whom they had made captive saw that, he was much stirred, and changed colour, and could not hold himself still. But though they tried to make him speak, he said never a word, and made no manner of sign, nor did he pay any heed to them whether they promised him good or ill. But when the dromedary began to blaze, they saw as though a flaming wave ran down into the sea, that moved the captive man much. They were quite sure then that they had looked for the goods carelessly, and now the metal had melted in the heat of the fire, whether it were gold or silver. Earl Rognvald and his men sailed thence south under Sarkland, and lay under a burg of Sarkland, and made a seven nights' truce with the townsmen, and had dealings with them, and sold them silver and other goods. No man would buy the tall man. And after that the earl gave him leave to go away, and four men with him. He came down the next morning with a train of men, and told them that he was a prince of Sarkland, and had been driven away to sea thence with the dromedary and all the goods that were aboard her; he said too he thought that worst of all that they burnt the dromedary, and made such waste of that great wealth that it was of no use to any one. ‘But now I have great power over your business here, and now ye shall have the greatest good from me for having spared my life, and treated me with such honour as ye could, but I would be very willing that we saw each other never again; and so now live safe and sound and well.’ After that he rode up the country, but Earl Rognvald sailed thence south to Crete, and lay there in very foul weather.”<a id="noteref-sea-roving-1" href="#note-sea-roving-1" epub:type="noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></p>
			<p>Who is there on reading this stirring story that is not reminded of Drake, Hawkins, and Cavendish, those sea-dogs of Elizabeth’s days, laying their little ships aboard great galleons and carracks, and hugging them broadside to broadside, as Earl Rognvald did the Dromedary, and thus winning wealth and fame by private war on the King of Spain, having, as old Fuller says, a clear case “in sea-divinity,” where “few are such infidels as not to believe doctrines which make for their own profit.” But lest any should say that Earl Rognvald’s exploit against the Dromedary was not a proof that the old Viking spirit still existed, we have only to turn to the same Orkney Saga farther on, and read what we hear of the deeds of one who was as thorough a Viking as Rolf Ganger, or any of the old heathens. This was the famous Sweyn Asleif’s son of Gairsay in the Orkneys, who was long the terror of the western seas. In the year 1171, long after the death of Earl Rognvald, which happened in 1158, Sweyn, who had been one of his adherents, led the life described in the Saga as follows:—“When Hacon, Earl Harold’s son, was but a few winter’s old, Sweyn Asleif’s son offered to take him as his foster-child, and he was bred up there, and as soon as ever he was so far fit that he could go about with other men, then Sweyn had him away with him a searoving every summer, and tried to honour him in everything. It was Sweyn’s wont at that time, that he sate through the winter at home in Gairsay, and there he kept always about him eighty men at his own cost. He had so great a drinking-hall, there was not another as great in all the Orkneys. Sweyn had in the spring hard work, and made them lay down very much seed, and looked much after it himself. But when that toil was ended, he fared away every spring on a viking-voyage, and harried about among the Southern isles and Ireland, and came home after midsummer. That he called spring-viking. Then he was at home until the corn fields were reaped down, and the grain seen to and stored. Then he fared away on a viking-voyage, and then he did not come home till the winter was one month off, and that he called his autumn-viking.</p>
			<p>“These tidings happened once on a time, that Sweyn Asleif’s son fared away on his spring-cruise, then Hacon Earl Harold’s son fared with him; and they had five ships with oars, and all of them large. They harried about among the Southern isles. Then the folk was so scared at him in the Southern isles, that men hid all their goods and chattels in the earth or in piles of rocks. Sweyn sailed as far south as Man, and got ill off for money. Thence they sailed out under Ireland and harried there. But when they came about south under Dublin, then two keels sailed there from off the main, which had come from England, and meant to steer for Dublin; they were laden with English cloth and great store of goods was aboard them. Sweyn and his men pulled up to the keels and offered them battle. Little came of the defence of the Englishmen, and there they robbed them of every penny which was aboard the keels, save that the Englishmen kept their wearing apparel and some food, and went on their way afterwards with their keels, but Sweyn and his men fared to the Southern isles and shared their war-spoil. They sailed from the west with great pomp. They did this as a glory for themselves when they lay in harbours, that they threw awnings of English cloth over their ships. But when they sailed into the Orkneys, they sewed the cloth on the fore-part of the sails, so that it looked in that wise as though the sails were made altogether of broadcloth. This they called “the broadcloth cruise.” Sweyn fared home to his house in Gairsay. He had taken from the keels much wine and English mead. Now when Sweyn had been at home a short while, he bade to him Earl Harold and made a worthy feast against his coming. When Earl Harold was at the feast, there was much talk amongst them of Sweyn’s good cheer. The Earl spoke and said:—‘ This I would now, Sweyn, that thou wouldest lay aside thy sea-rovings; ’tis good now to drive home with a whole wain; but thou knowest this, that thou hast long maintained thyself and thy men by sea-roving, but so it fares with most men who live by unfair means, that they lose their lives in strife, if they do not break themselves from it.' Then Sweyn answered and looked to the Earl, and spoke with a smile, and said thus:—' Well spoken is this, lord, and friendly spoken, and it will be good to take a bit of good counsel from you; but some men lay that to your door, that ye too are men of little fairness.' The Earl answered:—' I shall have to answer for my share, but a gossipping tongue drives me to say what I do.' Sweyn said:—' Good, no doubt, drives you to it, lord; and so it shall be, that I will leave off sea-roving, for I find that I am growing old, and strength lessens much in drenching seas and warfare; now I will go out on my autumn cruise, and I would that it might be with no less glory than the spring-cruise was; but after that my warfaring shall be over.' The Earl answers:—' 'Tis hard to see, messmate, whether death or lasting luck will come first.' After that they dropped talking about it. Earl Harold fared away from the feast, and was led out with fitting gifts; so he and Sweyn parted with great love-tokens. &quot; A little after Sweyn busks him for his roving cruise; he had seven long-ships and all great. Hacon, Earl</p>
			<p>They held on their course first to the Southern isles, and got there little war-spoil; thence they fared out under Ireland, and harried there far and wide. They fared so far south as Dublin, and came upon them there very suddenly, so that the townsmen were not ware of them before they had got into the town. They took there much goods. They made prisoners there those men who were rulers there in the town. The upshot of their business was that they gave the town up into Sweyn’s power, and agreed to pay as great a ransom as he chose to lay upon them. Sweyn was also to hold the town with his men and to have rule over it. The Dublin men swear an oath to do this. They fared to their ships at even, but next morning Sweyn was to come into the town, and take the ransom, place his men about the town, and take hostages from the townsmen. Now it must be told of what happened in the town during the night. The men of good counsel who were in the town held a meeting among themselves, and talked over the straits which had befallen them; it seemed to them hard to let their town come into the power of the Orkneyingers, and worst of all of that man whom they knew to be the greatest robber in the western lands. So they agreed amongst themselves that they would cheat Sweyn if they might. They took this counsel, that they dug great trenches before the burg-gate on the inside, and in many other places between the houses where it was meant that Sweyn and his men should pass, but men lay in wait there in the houses hard by with weapons. They laid planks over the trenches, so that they should fall down as soon as ever a man's weight comes on them. After that they strewed straw on the planks so that the trenches might not be seen, and so bided the morrow.</p>
			<p>&quot;On the morning after Sweyn and his men arose and put on their arms; after that they went to the town, and when they came inside about the burg-gate the Dublin men made a lane from the burg-gate right to the trenches. Sweyn and his men saw not what they were doing and ran into the trenches. The townsmen they ran straightway to hold the burg-gate, but some to the trenches, and brought their arms to bear on Sweyn and his men. It was unhandy for them to make any defence, and Sweyn lost his life there in the trench, and all those who had gone into the town. So it was said that Sweyn was the last to die of all his messmates, and spoke these words ere he died: 'Know that all men, whether I lose my life to-day or not, that I am one of the Saint Earl Rognvald's body-guard, and I now mean to put my trust in being there where he is with God.’ Sweyn’s men fared at once to their ships and pulled away, and nothing is told about their voyage before they come into the Orkneys. There now is an end of telling about Sweyn, and it is the talk of men that he hath been most of a man for his own sake in the western lands, both of yore and now-a-days, of those men who had no higher titles of honour than he.”<a id="noteref-sea-roving-2" href="#note-sea-roving-2" epub:type="noteref"><sup>2</sup></a></p>
			<p>Here again in “the broad-cloth cruize” of this veteran Viking, we are reminded of the return of the gallant Captain Cavendish in the year 1589, after he had sailed round the world and captured the Santa Anna, belonging to the King of Spain. “The passing up of the river of Thames by Mr. Cavendish,” says Captain Francis Allen, writing to Antony Bacon, 17th August 1589, “is famous, for his mariners and soldiers were clothed in silk, his sails of damask, his topmasts cloth of gold, and the richest prize that ever was brought at one time into England.”<a id="noteref-sea-roving-3" href="#note-sea-roving-3" epub:type="noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> In fact, sea-roving seems to have been in full vigour all through the middle ages. Chaucer’s Ship man, “good fellow” though he was, had few scruples—</p>
			<p>“ Ful many a draught of win he hadde draw From Burdeux ward, while that the chapmen slepe. Of nice conscience toke he no kepe; If that he faught, and hadde the higher hand, By water he sent hem home to every land.”</p>
			<p>Nor had the old Viking spirit at all died out during the days of the Tudors. If Drake and Cavendish answered in their goodness to Thorwald and Gunnar, we must not forget that there were other rovers who for wickedness, were a match to the worst of the old Vikings. “ The sea,” says Mr. Turn bull, writing of the reign of Edward the Sixth, “ was swept by privateers, who were little better than pirates, who plundered without scruple, and without discrimination of friend or foe, every vessel which came in their way.” *</p>
			<section id="sea-roving-queen-gunnhillda">
				<h3>Queen Gunnhillda</h3>
			<p>THE life of this remarkable woman merits more attention than could be devoted to it in the Introduction. She was the daughter of Auzur Toti, a man of rank and note of Helgeland, and after she had risen in life by her wedding and wickedness, wild stories ran as to her teaching in youth. She had been sent by her father, it was said, to Finn mark to learn witchcraft from the Finns; and some believed that Mattul, the Finnish king himself was her master in magic. At any rate there she was when Eric Bloodaxe, Harold Fair hair’s darling son, sailed back from Biarmaland or Per mia, whither he had been on a Viking cruize. As they ran by the coast of Finn mark, some of Eric’s men landed and went up the country. There they found in a hut a beautiful maiden, who told them her story, how she was Auzur’s daughter, and how her masters were the two wisest wizards in all Finn mark; they could run a scent like dogs, both on frozen and unfrozen earth; they glided so swiftly on snowshoon that neither man nor beast could overtake them; their arrows hit whatever they aimed at; and when they were angry, the landscape turned round at their glance, and if any living thing came before their eyes, it fell straightway dead to earth. But from masters they had both become lovers, and from the burden of their wooing she besought Eric’s men to set her free. The Finns were just then both out hunting, and the wily Gunnhillda, who had not been taught their lore in vain, hid the newcomers in the hut, and strewed something which looked like ashes outside and inside the cabin. When the Finns came home, they asked if any one had been there, and were astonished to hear her say “ No;” for they had followed the trail right up to the hut, and then lost it. When they had eaten and were full, she bade them lie down to sleep, one on either side of her, which they readily did, for neither had had any sleep for three days and nights, as each, jealous of the other, had not dared to take any rest. So she watched as they slept, and roused them up from time to time, to be sure that they were sound asleep. At last, as they slumbered and slept, she drew two sealskins over their heads, fastened them round their waists, and then gave the king’s men a sign to rush in and slay them. This was now an easy task. An awful storm arose as the spirits of the wizards passed from earth, but Eric’s men waited till its fury was spent, and then made for their ships, and brought Gunnhillda to their lord, who took her on board his ship, carried her to her father in Helgeland, and then and there married her. So ran the strange tale, in all likelihood a pure fable, though, as Munch well remarks, the fame of the Finns or Lapps as wizards was deep rooted, and the belief in their power of witchcraft so widely spread, that it is likely enough that parents, especially in a neighbouring district to Finn mark like Helgeland, may have really sent their children to that race of sorcerers to learn their black arts. The truth of the matter probably is, that Eric fell in with the beautiful maiden on his return from Per mia, and that the only witchcraft practised in the matter was that worked by Gunnhillda’s lovely face and artful mind, which held her husband in bondage ever afterwards. She is described as having been small of stature, but fair of face, of commanding mien, deep-thinking, glibspoken and fairspoken, grim-tempered, fickle in friendship, and very greedy of goods and land. Her husband was hard-hearted too, and greedy of gain too; he was a valiant champion and a lucky warrior, but in wit he was no match for his wife, for he was thoughtless, and had little forecast. In a word, he was made to be the slave of such a wife, and she became his evil genius. As to her age, she seems to have been born about 908, and to have been not more than fourteen years old when Eric’s men met her in Finn mark. As for Eric himself, he was born about 900. At twelve years of age his father fitted him out for his first Viking voyage, and for the next ten years he was almost always at sea. For four years he was the scourge of the eastern waters, and for another four years his course lay west. About</p>
			<p>920 he returned to his father, who was then growing old, and shared his realm amongst his sons, giving to Eric a rank above the rest, but retaining the supremacy for himself. In 922 Eric went to Per mia, and found Gunnhillda on his return. For ten years after Harold Fair hair had so shared his kingdom there was constant strife between his children. At last, unable to check their brawls, the aged king laid down the kingdom altogether in 930, resigning the supremacy to Eric, and died over eighty in 933. Before his death he had seen several grandchildren born to Eric and Gunnhillda, and one called Harold, afterwards surnamed Grayfell, was to succeed his father. Eric Bloodaxe had thus been three years supreme king over Norway when his father died, and meantime Gunnhillda had not been idle. “Their time was short,” says Fagrskinna, “but still the people thought it over long, for they called the king easy tempered, but as for the queen, she was the unkindest of women. It soon came out, too, that Eric had caused his brothers, Bjorn the chapman, and Olaf thick leg, and more of them to be slain, and it was the common talk that he meant to cut off all his brothers and so reign alone over the kingdom, and then raise his sons to the whole realm after his own days, and thus he became hated by the whole people.” But Harold Fair hair had a son beyond the reach of Gunnhillda; this was Hacon, whom his father had sent to be fostered at the court of the great English king Athelstane, for which reason he was called Hacon Athelstane’s foster-child. The year after his father’s death he set sail for Norway, and landing in a province which did not acknowledge Eric’s sway, he soon found such favour in the freemen’s eyes, chiefly by freeing them from the odious tax which Harold Fair hair had laid upon their alledial holdings, that they one and all declared Harold Fair hair had come back again; not the worn-out, grasping Harold of his latter days, but the young, warlike, blooming Harold who had won his way to glory. Between two princes, the one so popular and the other so hated, the struggle was not long doubtful. At first one province declared that they would have Hacon for their king, then another, and another, and at last, two years after his father’s death, Eric had to flee the land, and leave the kingdom to his brother. He betook himself to England, and found favour with King Athelstane, who gave him the lordship of Northumberland on condition that he should not molest his brother, the king’s foster-child, in Norway. But Eric was a restless spirit, and as he thought how small Northumberland was when matched with the wide lands which his father Harold Fair hair had left he took again to the sea. His chief lurking place was the Orkneys, and there Gunnhillda married Ragnhilda, a woman who was a worthy daughter of such mother, to Earl Havard, the son of Earl Thorfinn skull-splitter. With the aid of his followers and connections, Eric wasted France, Ireland, Scotland, and Wales with constant inroads, returning in the winter to his lordship in Northumberland. So things went on so long as Athelstane lived, but after his death, his half-brother Edmund, who hated the North men, took away Northumberland from Eric. This laid England open to the sea-king, who now had so large a host that five kings followed him to war. Brave and lucky, Eric trusted too much to his good fortune, and ventured up the country, wasting it far and wide. Edmund sent against him Olaf, or Anlaf, one of his tributary kings, and Eric was overborne by numbers in a bloody battle and fell, with the five kings who followed him, as well as Arnkel and Erlend, the Orkney earls. This was in the year 941. Gunnhillda was then, in all likelihood, with her daughter in Orkney; with all her faults, she seems to have loved her Viking lord, and had an ode made on his death, the beginning of which has been handed down to us, and which is a very grand piece of poetry.</p>
			<p>ERIC's DEATH SONG.</p>
			<p>&quot; What dreams !&quot; Odin spoke &quot; Methought ere day broke I garnished Valhalla For glory-full folk, Fast up from the fray Flitted forms of the fey, I wakened the warriors, Hah ! I bade them rise up Benches to furnish, Beer stoups to burnish, Valkyries bore wine-cup As though came a king. Hither from earth This morning must part Warriors of worth; Expect them ere evening, Glad is my heart.&quot;</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sea-roving-odin-asks">
				<h3>Odin Asks</h3>
			<p>&quot; O Bragi ! Why under A thousand doth thunder Our rainbow bridge ? Answer, What bodeth this host.&quot;</p>
			<p>‘ Lintel and rooftree, rafter and bar, Settle in hall, eke pillar and post, As these men march onward, tremble and jar, Quiver and quake, shiver and crack; Hall-doors fly open, wall-weapons rattle: In glory excelling, From Hell’s gloomy dwelling, With whirlwind of battle Our Balder comes back.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sea-roving-odin-answers">
				<h3>Odin Answers</h3>
			<p>‘ Unwisely now Bragi, Though wise, hast thou spoken: Valhalla kens better—Not Baldr’s this token—For Eric it groaneth, I tell thee his fall; Each champion so trusty, His lord now bemoaneth, With weapons war-rusty He wends to our hall.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sea-roving-odin-speaks">
				<h3>Odin Speaks</h3>
			<p>‘ Sigmund and Sinfjotli Up with you lithely, Out with you cheerily Eric to greet, Bid him in blithely—See ! He steps wearily, All up the rain-arch, Long is the day’s march—</p>
			<p>Hasten the hero on threshold to meet; Dreary the journey ’Neath buckler and byrnie, Hasten to bear up our chosen one’s feet.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sea-roving-sigmund-asks">
				<h3>Sigmund Asks</h3>
			<p>“ Why Eric of all Other kings must thou call ?”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sea-roving-odin-answers-2">
				<h3>Odin Answers</h3>
			<p>“ Because his brand ruddy, Clove helm after helm Because his blade bloody Smote realm after realm.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sea-roving-sigmund-asks-2">
				<h3>Sigmund Asks</h3>
			<p>“ Why snatch him then, father, From fortune and glory ? Why not leave him rather To fill up his story On victory’s road ?”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sea-roving-odin-answers-3">
				<h3>Odin Answers</h3>
			<p>“ Because no man knoweth When grey wolf so gory His grisly maw showeth In Asgard’s abode; Therefore Odin calleth, And Eric fain falleth, To follow his liege lord, and fight for his God.”</p>
			</section>
			<section id="sea-roving-sigmund-speaks">
				<h3>Sigmund Speaks</h3>
			<p>“ Hail to thee Eric now, Heartily welcome thou !</p>
			<p>Enter thou haughty king, Enter the hall; I ask but this only, What Princes from far Come with thee; not lonely Thou surely hast hastened, Leaving the battle where foemen fell chastened, Hither to Heaven, from hurly of war ?&quot;</p>
			<p>&quot; Kings five,&quot; Eric said, &quot; Their names I will tell, I the sixth, at their head, In the gory fight fell.&quot;</p>
			<p>After the death of Eric, Gunnhillda found shelter with her sons at the court of Harold Gorm's son, surnamed &quot; Blue tooth,&quot; or &quot; Waxy tooth.&quot; The Danish king even took her son Harold, known in our Saga as Harold Grayfell, as his foster-child, and aided both mother and sons in repeated attempts to recover their footing in Norway. Time after time they were worsted, and two or more of the princes slain by King Hacon. At last in the battle at Fitje, in 960, where Harold Grayfell had again been beaten by his valiant uncle, an arrow, after the fight was won, pierced the shoulder of King Hacon. The rude leechcraft of those days was unable to staunch the bleeding, an artery had been touched, and the best of Harold Fair hair's line bled to death. The belief of the age held Gunnhillda guilty of the deed, and thought that by her black arts she had wrought the death of her foeman by launching against him a magic shaft. It was clearly a random shot from some bow drawn at a venture which pierced the harness of the king as he followed on the footsteps of the fleers. After Hacon’s death Harold Grayfell succeeded to the central portion of Norway, at the express wish it is said of the dying Hacon. But this central portion of the land was too narrow for Gunnhillda. To the north, in Drontheim, ruled Earl Sigurd of Hladir, one of Harold Fair hair’s chieftains; south and south-east in the Uplands and in “the Bay,” ruled Gudred and Tryggvi, two grandsons of Harold Fair hair, and therefore Harold Grayfell’s first cousins. It would be long to tell the story of Gunnhillda’s plotting against these rivals near her throne, suffice it to say that first Earl Sigurd, and then both Gudred and Tryggvi fell victims to her guile. Gunnhillda, “Kings’ mother” as she was called, and her children, were now supreme rulers in Norway. It was a hard time in every way for the people. Harold Grayfell, who seems not to have been without a rough humour of his own,<a id="noteref-sea-roving-6" href="#note-sea-roving-6" epub:type="noteref"><sup>6</sup></a> and who was brave in common with all his race, was merely a tool in the hands of his mother. She had been brought back by foreign aid, and her aim was to rely not on the people so much, as on foreign aid to support her power. In those days the anger of heaven against princes and people was thought even more than in our time to be shewn in natural phenomena, so when harvest after harvest failed as soon as Harold Grayfell became king, that was thought to be a sign from heaven against the wickedness of the reigning house. It is at this period of Gunnhillda’s power that our Saga shews us how she ruled at the King’s Crag in “the Bay;” with regard to the relations of the queen with Hrut, we leave the Saga to speak for itself, only adding that other Ice-put into the Hard anger Firth, where King Harold then was. When they broke bulk and began to trade, few cared to buy the cargo. The captain, who was known before to Harold, went to him and complained that trade was so dull. The king said he would come and see him, and shortly after put out in a well manned galley. As soon as he got on board he looked at the wares, and asked the captain if he would give him “a grayfell,” or cape of gray fur. “With all my heart,” said the captain, “and more too, if you will.” So the king took the cape and threw it over his shoulders, and with that went over the side into his boat. But before he rowed away every one of his men had bought himself a cape, and in a few days after there were so many in the town that wished to buy capes, that the whole cargo was not enough to meet half the demand. After that the king was called “Grayfell.” landers found favour in her sight as well as the stalwart swordsman of the Western Dales.<a id="noteref-sea-roving-7" href="#note-sea-roving-7" epub:type="noteref"><sup>7</sup></a> At this time, 963, Gunnhillda must have been at least fifty-three years old, and Hrut about thirteen years younger. Laxdæla, which however is not so sure a guide as our Saga, tells us that Gunnhillda, after she had led him down to the ship, made him a speech full of praise, and given him a gold ring, “threw her cloak over her head and went back hastily to the town.” So things went on in Norway for six years after Hrut went back to Iceland. The fall of Gunnhillda and her sons is an instance of retribution worth recording. When Earl Sigurd of Hladir was cut off, he left a son who proved a far more formidable enemy than his father ever could have been. This was Earl Hacon, afterwards known by the name of the “mighty,” or the “bad,” as heathen or Christians spoke of his rule. He was of middle stature, fair in face, well skilled in arms, and very crafty and deep thinking. When his father died he was about twenty-five years of age, and for a time was able to hold his own against Gunnhillda. But when, shortly after, both Gudred and Tryggvi, who had been his allies, were cut off by treachery, Hacon was forced to fly, and after wasting Norway year after year, at last took shelter with king Harold, Gorm’s son, in Denmark. It may seem strange that he should fly for refuge to Harold Grayfell’s foster-father; but Gunnhillda, by taking possession of the provinces round the Bay, and especially by settling herself at the King’s Crag, had broken an agreement made with the Danish king, who looked on those border provinces as his own. Now it was that Earl Hacon began to shew that he was a greater master in craft and guile than Gunnhillda herself. King Harold Gorm’s son had a nephew named Gold-Harold, so called from the great wealth which he had won by Viking voyages. He was a bold warrior, and, as the son of the Danish king’s elder brother, had awkward claims to the crown. In fact he was a king without a crown, and eager to wear one. No wonder, then, that little love was lost between uncle and nephew. Soon after Earl Hacon reached the Danish king’s court he feigned illness and kept his lodging. Both the king and Gold-Harold came to see him, and both laid open their griefs to him. At last Earl Hacon told the king that it would be better to try and get Gold-Harold some other realm instead of Denmark, to which he had clear claims. “What did he say to helping him to become king of Norway?” The king thought Nor-foster-child. “A foster-child,” answered Hacon, “who has repaid you badly for all your help. As for the rest, I do not say make war on Norway, but send over and ask Harold Grayfell to come over and take up the fief which belongs to him here in Denmark, and when he comes Gold-Harold can fall on him and so win Norway.” “Very true,” said the king, “but ’tis an ill deed to betray one’s foster-child.” “Better kill a Norse Viking than thine own Dansk nephew,” was the answer. In this way the king’s consent was got, and at the same time Earl Hacon urged Gold-Harold to do the deed and win Norway, adding, that once master of that realm, he would find it easy work to recover Denmark when Harold Gorm’s son died. So a splendid embassy was sent to Norway to greet Harold Grayfell in the king’s name, and to say that as he had heard how hard the times were in Norway, he had sent to bid King Harold Grayfell to come with 200 men and take Jutland as a fief for that winter. The embassy at the same time said that Earl Hacon lay at death’s door. Though some suspected guile, the end of Harold Grayfell’s counsel was that he should go. Towards the end of summer he set out with three ships and eighty men in each. They ran into Liinfirth, where they were told to wait for the king. There Gold-Harold came against them with nine war-ships in full trim. After a brave fight Harold Grayfell’s little band were cut off to a man, and the first act of this tragedy was</p>
			<p>It is said that with his dying breath Harold Grayfell foretold the like fate for his adversary; nor was it long delayed. No sooner was the black deed done than Earl Hacon began to work on the Danish king’s fears. “ ’Twere a foolish thing to suffer Gold-Harold to seize on Norway. Only last winter he told me he meant to kill you.”</p>
			<p>“ But it is not seemly in me to kill my nephew,” said Harold Gorm’s son.</p>
			<p>“ Well,” answered the crafty earl, “ I will undertake to win Norway for you in a single day, and to be your faithful vassal and pay you tribute, if you will agree to take a compensation from me for killing your nephew.” *</p>
			<p>So the matter was settled, and Earl Hacon, who had twelve or fifteen ships all ready for sea, put out to seek</p>
			<p>Harold Grayfell. It was no hard thing to conquer him when he and his men were wounded and weary with fight. So, after a gallant struggle, Gold-Harold was cut off. Earl Hacon seized the gold from which the Danish prince derived his surname, and with it he paid the uncle the compensation for the death of the nephew. So far all the authorities agree. After this point some of them, and Snorro Sturla's son amongst the rest, say that King Harold Gorm's son raised a mighty host, with which he sailed for Norway, whence Gunnhillda and the sons she still had left fled before him. He then installed Earl Hacon as his vassal with supreme power, and returned to his own realm. This account leaves it uncertain where the wicked queen died; but her last shelter would in all likelihood have been the Orkneys, where her daughter Ragnhilda, after plotting the death of husband upon husband, was still in power. But according to other, and those not less trustworthy chroniclers, a far other doom overtook Gunnhillda. These authorities tell us, that Earl Hacon hastened to Norway while King Harold Gorm's son was gathering his host, boasted to Gunnhillda that he had avenged her son's death on Gold-Harold, and told her that he was the bearer of a message from the aged king of Denmark, that if she would come to visit him he would make her his wife. This offer was too much for the lustful woman. She set sail with three ships, and on landing in Jutland was met by the king's men, who were to lead her to the bridal feast. For a while the journey went well, but at nightfall, as they passed a dreary moor, her companions seized and plunged her into the morass, which was called afterwards “Gunnhillda’s moss.”<a id="noteref-sea-roving-9" href="#note-sea-roving-9" epub:type="noteref"><sup>9</sup></a></p>
			<p>If this story be true, and it is not so unlikely as some have wished it to seem, Earl Hacon had taken ample revenge for his father’s murder on Gunnhillda and her wicked house. Some have seen a strange corroboration of the story in the fact, that in the year 1836 there was found, near the ancient royal residence of Haraldskjær, at Veile, in Jutland, in a moss now called “Juthemose,” the body of a woman staked down into the morass. She was small of stature, of middle age, and wore a dress which, in the distant time to which the wearer plainly belonged, might have been of costly make and material. On this discovery, a controversy of some warmth arose in Denmark over these miserable remains, which ended, as such strife always ends, in no positive result. As the North men often employed this mode of execution on criminals of the weaker sex, as it is not certain that King Harold Gorm’s son lived at Haraldskjær, and as Juthemose, though it perhaps might be distorted out of Gunnhilldasmose, does not positively spring from that name; all that can be said for the story is, that, like the ownership of Alfred’s jewel in the Ashmolean Library at Oxford, it must always remain a problem whether this body was or was not that of Gunnhillda Kings’ mother; but, in conclusion, we may remark that the question, whether the remains were hers or no, in no way affects the authority of the story which tells of her tragical end in Jutland—a story which rests, in our opinion, on ground as firm as that which leaves it a matter of doubt how, or in what country, the wicked queen was overtaken by her last enemy.<a id="noteref-sea-roving-10" href="#note-sea-roving-10" epub:type="noteref"><sup>10</sup></a></p>
			</section>
			<hr/>
			<section id="sea-roving-endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Notes</h3>
				<p id="note-sea-roving-1"><a href="#noteref-sea-roving-1">1</a> Orkn. Saga. New ed. vol. i. pp. 359-69.</p>
				<p id="note-sea-roving-2"><a href="#noteref-sea-roving-2">2</a> Orkn. Sag., new ed., vol. i., pp. 461, 471.</p>
				<p id="note-sea-roving-3"><a href="#noteref-sea-roving-3">3</a> Athenæ Cantabrigienses, II., p. 546; (comp. p. 136 foll.) Cambridge, 1861.</p>
				<p id="note-sea-roving-4"><a href="#noteref-sea-roving-4">4</a> Calendar of State Papers, Foreign Series, 1547-1553, 1861, a work most ably and faithfully executed, but destined, alas! to remain unfinished, a monument of Protestant intolerance, in a land where liberty of conscience has hitherto been held to prevail.</p>
				<p id="note-sea-roving-5"><a href="#noteref-sea-roving-5">5</a> In this account of Eric's fortunes, Fagrskinna has been mainly followed. The dates are Guðbrandr Vigfússon's. The reader, who wishes to see a critical examination of all the autho-rities, must consult Munch, N. H. I., 726 foll., where Eric's fall is placed in the year 950.</p>
				<p id="note-sea-roving-6"><a href="#noteref-sea-roving-6">6</a> This is shown in the way in which he got his surname, “Grayfell.” It happened one summer, as we are told by Snorro Sturla’s son, that a ship from Iceland, laden with skins and furs,</p>
				<p id="note-sea-roving-7"><a href="#noteref-sea-roving-7">7</a> Olaf the peacock for instance, Hrut’s nephew, Laxd. 73, 75, 85; and Thorgils Scarleg’s foster-child.</p>
				<p id="note-sea-roving-8"><a href="#noteref-sea-roving-8">8</a> Unless this agreement had been made beforehand, Harold Gorm’s son would have had the blood feud against Earl Hacon, and might have taken his life in turn.</p>
				<p id="note-sea-roving-9"><a href="#noteref-sea-roving-9">9</a> The authorities for this story are,—(a), Olaf Tryggvi’s son’s Saga, in the Flatey Book; (b), Ágrip, a short Chronicle of Nor-way, ch. x.; and, (c), The Monk Theodorick, ch. 6; and (d), The Jomsvíkinga Saga. Three at least of these authorities are respectable enough; and, though the Jomsvíkinga Saga may be a late and romantic work, it by no means necessarily follows that it is untrue in giving this story. Nor is it, though Munch asserts it, at all clear that the story in all these authorities springs from one and the same source. It is remarkable, too, that Ágrip and Theodorick are Norwegian and not Icelandic authorities.</p>
				<p id="note-sea-roving-10"><a href="#noteref-sea-roving-10">10</a> See Munch, N. H. ii. 54, 55, who leans strongly to the side which asserts that Gunnhillda did not die in Jutland. See also</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>