<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Physical Features</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="appendix-6" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Physical Features</h2>
			<p>LET us begin with the beginning. Iceland is an island in the North Atlantic, on the very edge of the Arctic Circle; just on the verge of the domain of the old giants Frost and Snow, who lay their icy hands on one or two outlying capes and headlands. It stretches from 63° 24′ to 66° 30′ N. lat., and from 13° 15′ to 24° 40′ W. long. It contains more than 40,000 square miles, and is thus considerably larger than Ireland, the area of which we know to be 32,511 square miles. Let us suppose that we are nearing the island after the usual passage, and that we have made the land off Dyrhólaey, or Portland, on the south-west. We have then before us a narrow strip of coast, backed by huge Jökuls or ice mountains, down from whose flanks mighty glaciers stride to the sea, which is fed by them with fearful torrents. As we run along the land we have the Vest manna Eyjar, the West men's or Irishmen's Isles, on our lee, and are nearly off the mouth of Markarfljót (Markfleet), which sweeps to the main by many mouths, the east most of which runs sharp under the spurs of Eyjafell. Here the features of the land change. The mountains cease, and the coast trends away west in the shape of a broad irregular bay, the westernmost point of which is formed by the bold volcanic promontory which runs down from Arnesthing through Gullbringssysla, till it juts into the sea at Reykjaness. We have now a vast alluvial plain before us, which stretches away to the west further than the eye can reach, and runs up into the heart of the island, first as a dead flat, then as a swelling, rolling, upland plain, and at last is broken into dales leading up to the fells, or mountain plateau, which fill the centre of the island. Hekla “the Cloak” blocks up the background, and in the middle distance rise the three peaks of Thrihyrningr, “Threecorner,” as famous in our Saga as Eildon Hill in Scottish story. Within sight of the breakers which dash along the beach, stands a knoll or elevation, close to the midstream of Markfleet. It is almost the only bit of rising ground on the whole plain, and is well worthy of the reader’s attention. It is Bergthoirsknoll, the abode of Njal, the hero of our story. Now, still sailing west, we double the headlands of Reykjaness and Skagi, and are in the noble Faxafirth. On our right is Reykjavík, and forty miles before us, right across the firth, is Snæfell (Snow fell), that mighty mass of ice, rising more than 4700 feet above the level of the sea—a mountain which so many have wished to climb, while so few have succeeded in the attempt. In the midst of Faxafirth opens Borgarfirth, surrounded by a fruitful region, famous for having been the abode of Egil Skallagrim’s son and other great men. Beyond Öndverðarness we are in Breiðifjörðr (Broadfirth), the deepest, as Faxafirth is the widest, of all the Iceland firths, which, running deep into the land, throws off to the east an arm called Hvammsfirth, on the shores of which many fruitful dales open. This is the Dale Country, a district famous in Icelandic story, and which the reader must bear well in mind. The main arm of Broadfirth runs straight on till it ends in Gilsfirth. On the eastern shore of this mighty inlet, just before Hvammsfirth branches off from it, stands Helgafell, a very sacred spot in the annals of the land, but to us chiefly noteworthy as the abode of Snorri the priest, of whom we shall hear more in our Saga. Leaving the Broadfirth, with its many lesser firths and islands, we shape our course northwest, run through the race off Látrarröst, and pass in rapid succession the West Firths. On the shores of one of these, at Hawkdale in Dýrafirth, lived Gísli Súr’s son, a man of noble nature, the best skald perhaps that the island ever bred, and famous for his adventures as an outlaw. Now for a while our course is north till we turn Horn, the North Cape. Here we almost touch the Arctic Circle. Now our course is south-east, as we run along the coast into Strandarflói and Húnaflói, where the water so eats into the land at Bitrufirth as nearly to join Gilsfirth at the top of Broadfirth on the west and so to make the north-west district of the land, which we have just sailed round, an island of itself. Doubling another bluff-headed cape, we open the Skagafirth and sight Drángey, the Drongs, famous for Grettir the strong, the greatest of all Icelandic outlaws, and his fate; and so sailing east we come to one of the most famous districts in Iceland, the great island firth, Eyjafirth. Well up the firth, on the western shore, lay Modruvale (Möðruvellir), the abode of Gudmund the powerful, one of the greatest of Iceland’s chiefs, and of whom we shall hear in our story. Next we come to Skjálfandi the “ quaking, trembling” sheet of water, and Axe firth. Rounding the wild headland of Rifstangi, where we are fairly within the Arctic Circle, we skim across Thistle firth, and doubling Lánganes, Long ness, we steer southeast for Weaponfirth and the districts watered by the two great Jokul rivers, Jökulsdalewater and Lagarfleet. Now we run past the East Firths, which extend from</p>
			<p>Seydisfirth to Hornfirth, and pass many places mentioned in our Saga. Next we reach the narrow strip of foreshore, over which tower the hideous wastes of the Vatna Jökul, one peak of which, the Öræfa Jökul, is the highest point in the island, rising to more than 6400 feet ; and now we sight Ingolf’s Höfði, Ingolf’s Head, the first land made by the first settler from Norway, which juts out from an iron-bound coast, and has had a bad name, time out of mind, for the many wrecks which have happened underneath or near it. A few miles up the country just above it is Swinefell, the abode of Flosi, a man whom we shall soon know well. Further southwest along the coast are the great sands of Skeidará and the district of Meðall and, Middleland, once so fair, but wasted at the end of the last century, by the fearful eruptions of the Skaptá Jokul. Above Middleland is Siða “ the Side,” a strip of hillside country famous for the virtues of Hall of the Side. Now we near the stupendous crags of Höfðabrekka, Headbrink, where the mountains almost stride into the main ; and a few miles more bring us back to Dyrhólaey, or Portland, whence we began our voyage. A glance at the map will shew that the heart of the island is an elevated plateau out of which have risen peaks and blocks, bluffs and needles, such as Baula, and Bláfell and Eldborg, together with great layers and ridges of lava, at the bidding of the volcanic fire which works so wildly in the bowels of the earth. Out of those regions, alternately the prey of fire and frost, issue many streams, which vary in depth and bulk, as rains fall or snow melts. The chief of these for length and size are the Thurso (Þjórsá) and Markfleet (Markarfljót), in the south-west. The two White waters (Hvítá), one of which runs into the sea in the south-west at Eyrar, the other further west in Borgarfirth. In the north, the chief streams are the Bland water (Blandá), which runs into Hunafirth; Quake water (Skjálfandafljót) which runs into Skjálfandi Bay; and Jökul-water which runs into Axe firth. In the north-east, two great streams run down, side by side, from the northern face of the mighty Vatna Jökul, the Lagarfleet and Jökulsdale-water. They both fall into the sea at Hèraðsflói. On the southeast coast, the course of the rivers is shorter, but they are the worst of all to cross, fed as they are by the immense glaciers which lie close behind them, and rushing to the sea with a quick fall and straight course. The worst of all these streams is said to be the Fulilæk, or Jökulwater, which falls into the sea between Solheim and Skogar, and drains the Myrdal Jökul, one of the ravines of which, Kötlugjá, has been during the last summer (1860) the scene of the latest eruption of volcanic fire in Iceland.</p>
			<section id="physical-features-first-settlers">
				<h2>First Settlers</h2>
			<p>Such is a rapid sketch of the physical features of Iceland. If we look at the early history of the island we shall find that it had been visited long before the Norwegian sea-rovers ever sought its shores. Already in the eighth century of the Christian era it was well known to a class of men who have left their traces in almost every one of the outlying islands of the west. These were the Culdee anchorites, who sought those solitudes for the purposes of prayer and religious exercises, a class not likely to spread, since they were no lovers of women, but who left traces behind them in their cells and church furniture which were recognised by the early Icelanders themselves as having been the handiwork of Christian men. But besides these Icelandic traditions we have positive evidence of the fact. Dicuilus, an Irish monk, who, in the year 825, wrote a work, De Mensurâ Orbis, relates that at least thirty years before he had seen and spoken with several monks who had visited the island of Thile, as they called it. Besides other particulars, the story is accompanied with a calculation of the duration of the seasons and the length of the days at different times of the year, which shows clearly that Iceland, and Iceland alone, could have been the island visited by these anchorites.<a id="noteref-physical-features-1" href="#note-physical-features-1" epub:type="noteref"><sup>1</sup></a></p>
			<p>The common name for all these anchorites among the North men was Papar. Under this name we find them in Orkney and Shetland, in the Faroe Islands, and in Iceland, and to this day the name “Papey,” in all those localities, denotes the fact that the same pious monks who had followed St. Columba to Iona, and who had filled the cells at Enhallow, and Egilsha, and Papa in the Orkneys, were those who, according to the account of Dicuil, had sought Thile, or Iceland, that they might pray to God in peace.</p>
			<p>The first settlers on Iceland, then, were Irishmen and Christian priests ; the next more than half a century after were North men and priests also, but heathen priests, the first article of whose creed was work rather than prayer.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="physical-features-the-north-men-in-iceland">
				<h2>The North Men in Iceland</h2>
			<p>The men who colonized Iceland towards the end of the ninth century of the Christian æra, were of no savage or servile race. They fled from the overbearing power of the king, from that new and strange doctrine of government put forth by Harold Fair hair, 860—933, which made them the king’s men at all times, instead of his only at certain times for special service, which laid scatts and taxes on their lands, which interfered with vested rights and world-old laws, and allowed the monarch to meddle and make with the freemen’s allodial holdings. As we look at it now, and from another point of view, we see that what to them was unbearable tyranny, was really a step in the great march of civilization and progress, and that the centralization and consolidation of the royal authority, according to Charlemagne’s system, was in time to be a blessing to the kingdoms of the north. But to the freeman it was a curse. He fought against it as long as he could ; worsted over and over again, he renewed the struggle, and at last, when the isolated efforts, which were the key-stone of his edifice of liberty, were fruitless, he sullenly withdrew from the field, and left the land of his fathers, where, as he thought, no free-born man could now care to live. Now it is that we hear of him in Iceland, where Ingolf was the first settler in the year 874, and was soon followed by many of his countrymen. Now, too, we hear of him in all lands. Now France—now Italy—now Spain, feel the fury of his wrath, and the weight of his arm. After a time, but not until nearly a century has passed, he spreads his wings for a wider flight, and takes service under the great emperor at Byzantium, or Micklegarth—the great city, the town of towns—and fights his foes from whatever quarter they come. The Moslem in Sicily and Asia, the Bulgarians and Sclavonians on the shores of the Black Sea and in Greece, well know the temper of the northern steel, which has forced many of their chosen champions to bite the dust. Wherever he goes the North man leaves his mark, and to this day the lions of the Acropolis are scored with runes which tell of his triumph.</p>
			<p>But of all countries, what were called the Western Lands were his favourite haunt. England, where the Saxons were losing their old dash and daring, and settling down into a sluggish sensual race; Ireland, the flower of Celtic lands, in which a system of great age and undoubted civilization was then fast falling to pieces, afforded a tempting battle-field in the everlasting feuds between chief and chief; Scotland, where the power of the Picts was waning, while that of the Scots had not taken firm hold on the country, and most of all the islands in the Scottish Main, Orkney, Shetland, and the outlying Faroe Isles;—all these were his chosen abode. In those islands he took deep root, established himself on the old system, shared in the quarrels of the chiefs and princes of the Mainland, now helped Pict and now Scot, roved the seas and made all ships prizes, and kept alive his old grudge against Harold Fair hair and the new system by a long series of piratical incursions on the Norway coast. So worrying did these Viking cruizes at last become, that Harold, who meantime had steadily pursued his policy at home, and forced all men to bow to his sway or leave the land, resolved to crush the wasps that stung him summer after summer in their own nest. First of all he sent Kettle flat nose, a mighty chief, to subdue the foe ; but though Kettle waged successful war, he kept what he won for himself. It was the old story of setting a thief to catch a thief; and Harold found that if he was to have his work done to his mind he must do it himself. He called on his chiefs to follow him, levied a mighty force, and, sailing suddenly with a fleet which must have seemed an armada in those days, he fell upon the Vikings in Orkney and Shetland, in the Hebrides and Western Isles, in Man and Anglesey, in the Lewes and Faroe—wherever he could find them he followed them up with fire and sword. Not once, but twice he crossed the sea after them, and tore them out so thoroughly, root and branch, that we hear no more of these lands as a lair of Vikings, but as the abode of Norse Jarls and their udallers,<a id="noteref-physical-features-2" href="#note-physical-features-2" epub:type="noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> who look upon the new state of things at home as right and just, and acknowledge the authority of Harold and his successors by an allegiance more or less dutiful at different times, but which was never afterwards entirely thrown off.</p>
			<p>It was just then, just when the unflinching will of Harold had taught this stern lesson to his old foes, and arising in most part out of that lesson, that the great rush of settlers to Iceland took place. We have already seen that Ingolf and others had settled in Iceland from 874 downwards, but it was not until nearly twenty years afterwards that the island began to be thickly peopled. More than half of the names of the first colonists contained in the venerable Landnáma Book—the Book of Lots, the Doomsday of Iceland, and far livelier reading than that of the Conqueror—are those of North men who had been before settled in the British Isles. Our own country then was the great stepping-</p>
			</section>
			<hr/>
			<section id="physical-features-endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
				<h2 epub:type="title">Notes</h2>
				<p id="note-physical-features-1"><a href="#noteref-physical-features-1">1</a> See Dicuili Liber de Mensurâ Orbis Terræ, Ed Valckenaer Paris, 1807; and Maurer Beiträge Zur Rechtsgeschichte des Ger-manischen Nordens, I. 35.</p>
				<p id="note-physical-features-2"><a href="#noteref-physical-features-2">2</a> Udaller—freeholder—that is, the holder of certain property as his own, óðal, without any superior lord. The Low Latin allodium was made out of the word, whence our allodial. For every informa-tion as to the rights of the Orkney udallers, see “Oppressions in Orkney and Zetland,” presented to the Maitland and Abbotsford Clubs by Mr. Balfour, of Balfour and Trenaby, who has brought an amount of energy and learning to bear on the subject which de-serves all praise. stone between Norway and Iceland ; and this one fact is enough to account for the close connection which the Icelanders ever afterwards kept up with their kinsmen who had remained behind in the islands of the west.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>