<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Social Principles</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="appendix-8" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Social Principles</h2>
			<p>Of such men it was said that their “words could not be broken.” Njal was one of these men ; one of the wisest and at the same time most just and honourable of men. This gift ran in families, for Helgi Njal’s son had it, and it was beyond a doubt one of the deepest-rooted of all their superstitions.</p>
			<p>Besides this creed and these beliefs the new settler brought with him certain fixed social principles, which we shall do well to consider carefully in the outset. Out of a patriarchal state of society, and a religion based upon it, rose a great groundwork of principles upon which the whole fabric of social life in Iceland rested, and which must be kept steadily in view as landmarks, if we wish to understand the origin and development of an Icelandic commonwealth. First and foremost came the father’s right of property in his children. This right is common to the infancy of all communities, and exists before all law. We seek it in vain in codes which belong to a later period, but it has left traces of itself in all codes, and, abrogated in theory, still often man like Snorri was vitr maðr, but he would not be forspár. In later times, when the old belief was dying out, this proverb was common, “spá er spaks geta,” “prophecy is a wise man’s guess.” exists in practice. We find it in the Roman law, and we find it among the North men. Thus it was the father's right to rear his children or not at his will. As soon as it was born, the child was laid upon the bare ground; and until the father came and looked at it, heard and saw that it was strong in lung and limb, lifted it in his arms, and handed it over to the women to be reared, its fate hung in the balance, and life or death depended on the sentence of its sire.<a id="noteref-social-principles-1" href="#note-social-principles-1" epub:type="noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> After it had passed safely through that ordeal, it was duly washed, signed with Thor's holy hammer, and solemnly received into the family. If it were a weakly boy, and still more often, if it were a girl, no matter whether she were strong or weak, the infant was exposed to die by ravening beasts, or the inclemency of the climate. Many instances occur of children so exposed, who, saved by some kindly neighbour, and fostered beneath a stranger's roof, thus contracted ties reckoned still more binding than blood itself.<a id="noteref-social-principles-2" href="#note-social-principles-2" epub:type="noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> So long as his children remained under his roof, they were their father's own. When the sons left the paternal roof, they were emancipated, and when the daughters were married they were also free, but the marriage itself remained till the latest times a matter of sale and barter in deed as well as name. The wife came into the house, in the patriarchal state, either stolen or bought from her nearest we know, from the account contained in Njála, which is amply borne out by other sources of information, that, down to the Change of Faith, the practice of exposure—which points terribly to the difficulty felt in supporting a family—prevailed in full force. To leave off idol worship, not to expose their children to perish, and not to eat horseflesh, are the three great abominations which all Christian men must forsake. The two first speak for themselves; the eating of horseflesh needs a word or two of explanation. Horses, though affording very wholesome food, could never have been at any time very cheap eating. The horseflesh thus branded was the flesh of the sacred horses sacrificed before the heathen altars, at the great feasts in honour of the gods. The Christian missionaries looked upon it in the same light as the meat offered to idols was regarded by the Apostles, and forbade it accordingly. To eat horseflesh was an abominable heathen practice, and as such it was literally thrown in the teeth of Thorkel foulmouth by Skarphedinn, ch. 119, p. 142, and was resented accordingly. It is strange how long a prejudice lasts. If horseflesh were cheap, there could not be more wholesome food, and yet the very notion of eating it at all would be abhorrent to the minds of most persons. It would be well if all the precepts of Christianity had become as thoroughly part and parcel of our belief as this question of meats—this prohibition to eat the flesh of animals offered to idols.</p>
			<p>male relations; and though in later times when the sale took place it was softened by settling part of the dower and portion on the wife, we shall do well to bear in mind, that originally dower was only the price paid by the suitor to the father for his good will; while portion, on the other hand, was the sum paid by the father to persuade a suitor to take a daughter off his hands. Let us remember, therefore, that in those times, as Odin was supreme in Asgard as the Great Father of Gods and men, so in his own house every father of the race that revered Odin was also sovereign and supreme. In the second place, as the creed of the race was one that adored the Great Father as the God of Battles; as it was his will that turned the fight; nay, as that was the very way in which he chose to call his own to himself,—it followed, that any appeal to arms was looked upon as an appeal to God. Victory was indeed the sign of a rightful cause, and he that won the day remained behind to enjoy the rights which he had won in fair fight, but he that lost it, if he fell bravely and like a man, if he truly believed his quarrel just, and brought it without guile to the issue of the sword, went by the very manner of his death to a better place. The Father of the Slain wanted him, and he was welcomed by the Valkyries, by Odin’s corse-choosers, to the festive board in Val- halla. In every point of view, therefore, war and battle was a holy thing, and the North man went to the battlefield in the firm conviction that right would prevail. In modern times, while we appeal in declarations of war to the God of Battles, we do it with the feeling that war is often an unholy thing, and that Providence is not always on the side of strong battalions. The North man saw Providence on both sides. It was good to live, if one fought bravely, but it was also good to die, if one fell bravely. To live bravely and to die bravely, trusting in the God of Battles, was the warrior's comfortable creed. But this feeling was also shewn in private life. When two tribes or peoples rushed to war, there Odin, the warrior's god, was sure to be busy in the fight, turning the day this way or that at his will; but he was no less present in private war, where in any quarrel man met man to claim or to defend a right. There, too, he turned the scale and swayed the day, and there too an appeal to arms was regarded as an appeal to heaven. Hence arose another right older than all law, the right of duel—of wager of battle, as the old English law called it. Among the North men it under laid all their early legislation, which, as we shall see, aimed rather at regulating and guiding it, by making it a part and parcel of the law, than at attempting to check at once a custom which had grown up with the whole faith of the people, and which was regarded as a right at once so timehonoured and so holy.<a id="noteref-social-principles-3" href="#note-social-principles-3" epub:type="noteref"><sup>3</sup></a></p>
			<p>Thirdly, we must never forget that, as it is the Christian’s duty to forgive his foes, and to be patient and longsuffering under the most grievous wrongs, so it was the heathen’s bounden duty to avenge all wrongs, and most of all those offered to blood relations, to his kith and kin, to the utmost limit of his power.<a id="noteref-social-principles-4" href="#note-social-principles-4" epub:type="noteref"><sup>4</sup></a> Hence arose the constant blood-feuds between families, of which we shall hear so much in our story, but which we shall fail fully to understand, unless we keep in view, along with this duty of revenge, the right of property which all heads of houses had in their relations. Out of these twofold rights, of the right of revenge and the right of property, arose that strange medley of forbearance and bloodthirstiness which stamps the age. Revenge was a duty</p>
			<p>The following pretty story, illustrating the duty of revenge, is from Grettir's Saga, ch. 41, Ed. Kbh., 1853:—&quot;It fell on a morning as those brothers Grettir and Thorstein lay in their sleeping-loft, that Grettir had put his arms out of the bed-clothes; Thorstein woke up and saw that. A little after Grettir woke up too. Then Thorstein said, 'I have seen thy arms, kinsman,' said he, 'and methinks it is not wonderful though thy blows fall heavy on many, for no man's arms have I ever seen like them in my life.' 'It might have been known though,' said Grettir, 'that I could not have brought such things to pass as I have done if my joints had not been very well knit.' 'Methinks,' says Thorstein, 'I should like them better if they were slenderer but a little luckier.' 'True it is,' said Grettir, 'as the saying goes, that no man is his own maker; now let me see thy arms.' Thorstein let him see them; he was one of the tallest and slightest-made of men. Grettir smiled when he saw them, and said, 'There's no need to look longer at these, all thy ribs are cramped together, and I think I never saw such a pair of tongs as thou bearest about with thee for arms. I hardly think thee as strong as a woman.' 'That may be,' said Thorstein, 'but yet thou shalt know this, that these my slender arms will avenge thee, or thou wilt never be avenged. Who can tell what may happen till the end comes.' &quot; and a right, but property was no less a right ; and so it rested with the father of a family either to take revenge, life for life, or to forego his vengeance, and take a compensation in goods or money for the loss he had sustained in his property. Out of this latter view arose those arbitrary tariffs for wounds or loss of life, which were gradually developed more or less completely in all the Teutonic and Scandinavian races, until every injury to life or limb had its proportionate price, according to the rank which the injured person bore in the social scale. These tariffs, settled by the heads of houses, are, in fact, the first elements of the law of nations ; but it must be clearly understood that it always rested with the injured family either to follow up the quarrel by private war, or to call on the man who had inflicted the injury to pay a fitting fine.<a id="noteref-social-principles-5" href="#note-social-principles-5" epub:type="noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> If he refused, the feud might be followed up on the battlefield, in the earliest times, or in later days, either by battle or by law. Of the latter mode of proceeding, we shall have to speak at greater length farther on ; for the present, we content ourselves with indicating these different modes of settling a quarrel in what we have called the patriarchal state. A fourth great principle of his nature was the con- viction of the worthlessness and fleeting nature of all worldly goods. One thing alone was firm and unshaken, the stability of well-earned fame. “Goods perish, friends perish, a man himself perishes, but fame never dies to him that hath won it worthily.” “One thing I know that never dies, the judgment passed on every mortal man.” Over all man’s life hung a blind, inexorable fate, a lower fold of the same gloomy cloud that brooded over Odin and the Æsir. Nothing could avert this doom. When his hour came, a man must meet his death, and until his hour came he was safe. It might strike in the midst of the highest happiness, and then nothing could avert the evil, but until it struck he would come safe through the direst peril. This fatalism showed itself among this vigorous pushing race in no idle resignation. On the contrary, the North man went boldly to meet the doom which he felt sure no effort of his could turn aside, but which he knew, if he met it like a man, would secure him the only lasting thing on earth—a name famous in song and story. Fate must be met then, but the way in which it was met, that rested with a man himself, that, at least, was in his own power ; there he might show his free will; and thus this principle, which might seem at first to be calculated to blunt his energies and weaken his strength of mind, really sharpened and hardened them in a wonderful way, for it left it still worth everything to a man to fight this stern battle of life well and bravely, while its blind inexorable nature allowed no room for any careful weighing of chances or probabilities, or for any anxious prying into the nature of things doomed once for all to come to pass. To do things like a man, without looking to the right or left, as Kari acted when he smote off Gunnar's head in Earl Sigurd's hall, was the North man's pride. He must do them openly too, and show no shame for what he had done. To kill a man and say that you had killed him, was manslaughter ; to kill him and not to take it on your hand was murder (morðvig, lönvig).<a id="noteref-social-principles-6" href="#note-social-principles-6" epub:type="noteref"><sup>6</sup></a> To kill men at dead of night was also looked on as murder.<a id="noteref-social-principles-7" href="#note-social-principles-7" epub:type="noteref"><sup>7</sup></a> To kill a foe and not bestow the rights of burial on his body by throwing sand or gravel over him, was also looked on as murder.</p>
			<p>Even the wicked Thiostolf throws gravel over Glum in our Saga, and Thord Freedman’s son’s complaint against Brynjolf the unruly was, that he had buried Atli’s body badly. Even in killing a foe there was an open gentlemanlike way of doing it, to fail in which was shocking to the free and outspoken spirit of the age. Thorgeir Craggeir and the gallant Kari wake their foes and give them time to arm themselves before they fall upon them; and Hrapp, too, the thorough Icelander of the common stamp, “the friend of his friends and the foe of his foes,” stalks before Gudbrand and tells him to his face the crimes which he has committed. Robbery and piracy in a good straightforward wholesale way were honoured and respected; but to steal, to creep to a man’s abode secretly at dead of night and spoil his goods, was looked upon as infamy of the worst kind. To do what lay before him openly and like a man, without fear of either foes, fiends, or fate; to hold his own and speak his mind, and seek fame without respect of persons; to be free and daring in all his deeds; to be gentle and generous to his friends and kinsmen; to be stern and grim to his foes, but even towards them to feel bound to</p>
			<p>Bloodaxe, wishes to have Egil put to death at night, and Arinbjörn says, “The King (Eric) must not let himself be goaded on to do all thy dastardly deeds. He must not let Egil be put to death to-night, for night-slayings are murders.” fulfil all bounden duties ; to be as forgiving to some as he was unyielding and unforgiving to others. To be no truce breaker, nor tale bearer nor backbiter. To utter nothing against any man that he would not dare to tell him to his face. To turn no man from his door who sought food or shelter, even though he were a foe—These were other broad principles of the North man's life, further features of that steadfast faithful spirit which he brought with him to his new home.</p>
			<section id="social-principles-the-landnamtide">
				<h3>The Landnamtide.</h3>
			<p>Strong in this faith then, with a feeling of fate above him, weighed down by many superstitions, but upheld by a natural nobleness and manliness of character ; clinging to his natural kingship and priesthood as inalienable rights, and trusting to his own good sword, the North man steered for Iceland. In some cases a manslaughter, in some the fame of the new land, in some a prophecy, in some the invitation of friends and kinsmen who had gone before, but in most, it was the overbearing of Harold Fair hair<a id="noteref-social-principles-8" href="#note-social-principles-8" epub:type="noteref"><sup>8</sup></a> that led him thither. And so they came all together, simple yeomen, rich landowners, children of lords and earls, in two great streams, one from Norway and the other Northern Kingdoms, about</p>
			<p>874, and one twenty years later from the West, as we have said, and in such numbers that it was feared that all the best blood of the land was leaving the shores of the North Sea, and Harold tried to stop the tide of emigration by a fine. As they neared the shores of the great island, the choice of the spot for a settlement was left to chance, that is, in those days which allowed the doctrine of chances far less than our own, to the decision of the Gods. The readiest way to ascertain their will, was to hurl those sacred pillars of the high-seat over board, to let them drive at the will of the winds and waves, and then to occupy that portion of the island which lay next to the beach where they were thrown on shore.<a id="noteref-social-principles-9" href="#note-social-principles-9" epub:type="noteref"><sup>9</sup></a> The first step after landing was to view or “ken”<a id="noteref-social-principles-10" href="#note-social-principles-10" epub:type="noteref"><sup>10</sup></a> the land by mounting to the top of some high ground, when, if the spot seemed likely to meet the settler’s wants, he went on to make it his own by peculiar rites and ceremonies. This was called “to hallow the land;” and it was done by surrounding it with a ring of fires, each of which was in sight of those nearest to it on either side, or by merely lighting a bonfire at the mouth of each river, which act was supposed to hallow it, as well as all the streams which flowed into it. This solemnity was also called, to encircle the land with fire,<a id="noteref-social-principles-11" href="#note-social-principles-11" epub:type="noteref"><sup>11</sup></a> and the portion thus hallowed became the settler’s own,<a id="noteref-social-principles-12" href="#note-social-principles-12" epub:type="noteref"><sup>12</sup></a> and was marked out by certain natural features or artificial signs, which formed the boundaries of his estate. Then came the work of building the house and farm buildings, the enclosure of the yard, and “town” or home fields, all necessary tasks, which, though little has been handed down to us from the earliest times as to their form and construction, we may infer from the toughness with which the race has clung to its traditions, were not unlike those which we find existing in the next century. But besides these domestic buildings, the great chiefs who were the first settlers invariably built another. This was the Hof or temple for the gods, and this it is not hard to restore. These buildings consisted of two parts, a nave and a shrine, which last is expressly compared to the choir or chancel of Christian churches. This shrine was the true sanctuary. It was built round and arched. In it, in a half circle, stood the images of the gods, and before them, in the middle of the half circle, was the altar (stalli). On it lay the holy ring (baugr), on which all solemn oaths were sworn ; and there, too, was the blood-bowl (hlautbolli) in which the blood of the slaughtered victims was caught, and the blood-twig (hlauttvein) with which the worshippers were sprinkled, to hallow them in the presence of the Almighty Gods. On the altar burned the holy fire, which was never suffered to be quenched.</p>
			<p>The worship of the gods consisted in offerings or sacrifices (blót, forn) of all living things, sometimes even of men. These for the most part were criminals or slaves, and therefore, in the first case, these human sacrifices stood in the same position as our executions. Near every Thing-field, a spot closely connected with the Temple, stood the stone of sacrifice, on which the backs of those victims were crushed and broken, and the holy pool in which another kind of human sacrifices were solemnly sunk. But these human sacrifices, though allowable, were not common; and when we read that the mythical Swedish king On offered up, one after another, nine sons of his body for the sake of lengthening his own life, and that the Swedish freemen offered up their king Donald, and their king Olaf Tree feller, because the harvests were so bad; and that, finally, the wicked Earl Hacon, a more historical character, offered up his own son to his favourite divinity, Thorgerda Shrinebride, in order to win the day when he was about to be worsted by the Vikings of Jomsborg, we may be sure that these were all great exceptions, for some of which might find parallels in Biblical, and for some in British history. We might as well infer that the Jews were given to human sacrifices, or the English were fond of offering up their kings, because in the one case Abraham obeyed the divine command, and in the other the Round heads were driven by the duplicity of Charles to put him to the worst use which bad subjects can make of a weak king, that of cutting off his head, and thus making him a martyr.<a id="noteref-social-principles-13" href="#note-social-principles-13" epub:type="noteref"><sup>13</sup></a> Still there were human sacrifices in those times, but the bulk of the victims was of another kind. Horses were sacrificed, and oxen and swine, and sheep, which were all fattened for the festival. Brought before the images of the gods they were slaughtered, the blood was caught, and with it the worshippers were sprinkled, as well as the images, altar, and walls of the shrine. The fat was melted and the images were anointed with it, and then rubbed dry and polished. Now the sacrifice turned into a feast; the flesh of the victims was boiled in huge kettles, which swung over fires lighted down the whole length of the nave, the worshippers took their seats down rows of benches on each side, and ate the flesh and supped the broth. Beer and mead were tapped, and then the chief whose temple it was, and who filled the office of priest, rose from his high seat, in the middle of the bench, was so hated as he.&quot; We are still more justified in drawing this inference, though certainly at a later period, from the words of Hjallti and Gizur at the Althing, just before the adoption of Christianity. &quot; The heathen sacrifice the worst of men, and launch them over cliffs and crags, but we will choose our best men as a gift of victory to God.&quot; This was just after the heathen party had resolved, at their direst need, to sacrifice two men out of each Quarter of the island. The practice had evidently degenerated as much as it had amongst the Greeks in the time of Aristophanes, when the scapegoats for sacrifice were chosen from the dregs of the community. Comp. Aristoph. Ranæ, 732. . . . οἷσιν ἡ πόλις πρὸ τοῦ Οὐδὲ φαρμακοῖσιν εἰκῇ ῥᾳδίως ἐχρήσατ’ ἄν.</p>
			<p>on the right hand of the nave, and blessed the meat and drink. His duty it was to utter the sacred toasts.<a id="noteref-social-principles-14" href="#note-social-principles-14" epub:type="noteref"><sup>14</sup></a> To Odin first the bowl was drained for victory and strength. The next to Njord and Frey, for peace and good harvests. A third to Thor, “the almighty God,” as he was called, the North man’s darling god, and so on, to Bragi the god of song and mirth, and to Freyja, the goddess of love and beauty ; last of all came the cup to the memory of friends and kinsmen dead and gone. Thus merrily and heartily did the sacrifice end, and an awful solemnity was thus softened into the festivities of an annual merrymaking. On such occasions also it was usual to make solemn vows to do this or that daring deed, by such and such a stated time ;<a id="noteref-social-principles-15" href="#note-social-principles-15" epub:type="noteref"><sup>15</sup></a> and it was reckoned unlucky and disgraceful not to fulfil them. This was done over Bragi’s cup, and he that made the vow, mounted a raised platform in order to be better seen and heard by the company. It often happened that the truth of the old Norse proverb, “Ale is another man”—answering to our “when the wine is in the wit is out”—was fully proved ; and those who in their cups had vowed rash vows, woke up the next morning with the feeling that they had undertaken a task which they were hardly fitted to fulfil.<a id="noteref-social-principles-16" href="#note-social-principles-16" epub:type="noteref"><sup>16</sup></a> But to return to the settler. After he had hallowed his lot or landnám, built his house and his temple, fenced in his fields, and raised his march-stones, he proceeded to allot portions of his possessions to his kinsmen, followers, and friends. In early times, when the island was waste, this was an easy task. There was ample elbowroom. The tracts taken by the first settlers were so immense, that they stood in need of many separate abodes to bring them into cultivation. To take only one instance of a settlement in a part of Iceland with which the reader will soon, it is hoped, be better acquainted. In the south-west of Iceland, Kettle hæing,<a id="noteref-social-principles-17" href="#note-social-principles-17" epub:type="noteref"><sup>17</sup></a> who came to Iceland from Naumdale in Norway, in the year 877, three years after Ingolf the first settler, took as his lot or landnám all the Rangriver vales between Thursowater and Markfleet, from the shore right up to the fell. In such a tract there was room for many homesteads, and it will soon be seen with what great chiefs the district was filled. This allotment was called by various names; sometimes it is termed, “to give land,” or “to show to land,” on the part of the first settler, and “to receive,” or “to take land in such a man’s landnám,” on the part of the new comer. So also, we hear of taking land “at the advice” of such a settler, or “with his leave;” and it is plain from many cases, that these expressions imply something more than mere friendly advice to a stranger as to the spot which was most likely to suit him, and point rather to leave asked and granted from a superior to one, who by that very fact acknowledged himself to be in an inferior position. Sometimes, of course, as in the case of brothers and kinsmen, or dear friends, the leave meant little more than a desire that those so close in blood should also be near in their abode; sometimes, too, the relation that existed between the new comer and the first settler was rather that of landlord and tenant than of those who met on equal terms; but in all cases of such relations, whether equal or un- asunder at the middle.” His father then gave him trout as his nickname, and he was called Kettle “hæng” or “trout” ever afterwards. See Fornaldar Sögur, ii. 111, 112.</p>
			<p>equal, there was no doubt a feeling of reliance and dependence which often offended the free spirit of the race. Thus Hallstein son of the great chief Thorolf Mostrarskegg deems it unworthy to allow his own father to “show him to land,” and betakes himself to another district, to seize an unoccupied lot for himself. Another, Halkell the brother of Kettlebjörn the old, will not hear of taking a portion of the land which his brother, a mighty chief, has settled on, but prefers to turn out an earlier settler by a duel ;<a id="noteref-social-principles-18" href="#note-social-principles-18" epub:type="noteref"><sup>18</sup></a> and Steinuna, a woman, prefers to buy a bit of land in her kinsman Ingolf's landnám, rather than to take it from him as a gift.</p>
			<p>It is easy to explain this dislike of the freeman, as well as of the free woman, to have land assigned or given to them, even when it became their own allodial holding. The feeling which underlies the dislike is that which looks upon gifts, if they are not returned by something of equal worth, as degrading and dishonouring to the free born man. The same feeling still lingers in the hearts of all the Teutonic and Scandinavian races, but in those times it was intense. Tacitus has well caught this principle when he describes the Germans as “ delighting in gifts, but as setting little store or obligation on their acceptance.” That was the freeman's feeling. He took and he gave gifts from and to equals, and they met free and parted free ; but the gifts which a superior gives to an inferior, and such a gift it was to have land given to one in another man's landnám, implied at once the undertaking of duties and obligations to the giver which must be fulfilled when he claimed them. The very act implied allegiance to a lord and master, and as such was offensive to a free spirit. Anything, in short, which hindered a freeman from meeting his equals on equal terms, was a disgrace. To take land was a gift which could not be repaid in kind. It lowered his self-respect, if it led to nothing worse, by putting him in a false position, and as such he scorned it. But we must hasten on. The period during which the settlement of Iceland was going on lasted about sixty years. At the end of that time the island was as fully peopled as it has ever been since, and the number of inhabitants may be reckoned at 50,000 souls ; an enormous number to have flocked together in so short a space of time. During all that period each chief, and his children after him, had lived on his holding, which formed a little kingdom of itself, allotting his land to new comers whose kinship, turn of mind, or inferiority in rank allowed them to accept the gift, marrying and inter-marrying with the families of neighbouring chiefs, setting up his children in abodes of their own, putting his freedmen and thralls out in farms and holdings, fulfilling the duties of the priesthood in his temple, and otherwise exercising what we should now call the legitimate influence on those around him to which he was entitled by his strength of arm, or birth, or wealth.</p>
			</section>
			<section id="social-principles-civil-power-of-the-priests">
				<h3>Civil Power of the Priests.</h3>
			<p>We have hitherto only looked at the priesthood of these chiefs from one point of view. There was no priesthood among the Scandinavian races, if we mean by priesthood a separation of society into the two classes of priests and laymen. Church and State in fact were both one. The word for priest was goði or hofgoði (temple-priest), and, besides his priestly functions, the very circumstances of birth, wealth, and influence, which led to his fulfilling those functions, gave him social power of another kind. He was the only civil, just as he was the only religious authority—minister and magistrate in one ; but in that wild and shifting state of society his power might be of a very fleeting kind. When one of these great chiefs built his hof or temple on the land which he had occupied, the neighbours flocked to it, not because they were bound to do so by any law, but because it was their natural place of worship. The voluntary principle was then triumphant, and as it was free to any man in the neighbourhood, even in the same landnám, to build a temple for himself, so it stood free to the neighbours to worship at that temple if they chose. This fact leads to another consideration. As the influence exercised by the chiefs depended as much on bodily strength, personal prowess, and skill in arms, as on birth and wealth, it often happened that the influence of a great chief might wane as he grew old, or lost his children or kinsmen, and that the influence of others in the neighbourhood rose in the same proportion. It followed, therefore, that after a great chief had allotted all his land, he might find, at the end of his life, that he had raised up most dangerous rivals to himself, that his temple was deserted, and that the eyes of the neighbours were now turned to another lord. If a man attained a green old age, if he lived surrounded by strong and stalwart sons, he might keep his influence till his death, and the family tradition might be prolonged, as we know it was in many families ; but in the contrary case, he lost the reality of his power, though he kept the shadow. He was, in fact, left like a clergyman on the voluntary principle, without a congregation. If this was so with regard to the priestly part of his functions, it was still more so with regard to what might be called his social and judicial duties. Besides the care of the temple, the judicial and executive belonged to him. To him it belonged to call together the Things, or meetings of the people, at stated times, to discuss public business. As priest he hallowed the Thing, encircled it with the holy bands (vébönd), and proclaimed peace while it lasted; as chief magistrate in the new land, as he had filled the same office in the old, he presided over the meeting. In trials, which were conducted on time-honoured principles which the settlers brought with them from the land of their fathers, it fell on him to name the judges, and to superintend the proceedings. In short, he takes the leadership of the district; he is bound to protect those under and belonging to him, and they owe him help and allegiance. He keeps the peace, chases robbers out of the country; in times of scarcity he takes measures to avert the evil. If foreign ships run into any port in his district he is the first to board them; they may not trade till he has settled the price at which the cargo is to be offered for sale, and he it is that fixes where the crew are to be lodged when they lay up their ship for the winter. He rides to the Things with a train of his Thingmen at his back. In later times he could call on the ninth part of his Thingmen to follow him to the Althing, and when there they were bound to back him in his suits and quarrels, while it was his duty to stand by them, and see them righted in theirs. The power and influence of the Priest, in short, extended to every branch of what we should now call the public service ; and though the power he exerted, and the subordination which he exacted, were undefined in principle, and depended much on the energy and strength of character of each possessor of the office, there can be no doubt that in the very earliest times it was not only one of great power and importance, but the sole existing authority.</p>
			<p>One great check on the tendency of this undefined power to become arbitrary and tyrannical, is to be found in the fact before alluded to, that every Thing man was free at any time to leave the Temple and Thing of his Priest, and to join that of another. In this way public opinion might, and in many cases did manifest itself; and this carrying out of the voluntary principle in regard to the social and judicial position of the Priest, as well as in that of his purely religious functions, was some safeguard of the community against an abuse of power. In later times, at least, when the office had come to be considered in the light of family property, and could, as such, be bought and sold, this original right was acknowledged by the fact, that it was usual for the incoming priest to call the men of the Thing to a meeting, and to ask whether they were willing to place themselves under his jurisdiction. Practically, no doubt, this right to join the Thing of another priest was of little value in the early days of the settlement, except as the assertion of a principle, as it was likely to bring down on the head of the dissatisfied dependent the wrath of his superior. It follows from what has been already said, that the office was one of purely personal relation, and in its principle in no way depended on territory. Accidentally, and as a matter of fact, no doubt, and more especially in early times, the common people of a district, who had settled in the lot of a great chief, followed him territorially as well as personally ; residence and subordination were identical. But, as we have seen, as time rolled on the island became more thickly peopled, the respect for an old house might dwindle away, while that for a new one might spring up ; there, too, men worshipped the rising sun ; and so, in the same district there might be two temples, which it might be equally convenient to visit, and two priests, one weak and the other powerful ; but as defence or protection was one of the claims which the Thing man had upon his leader, he would naturally seek the superior who would be most likely to afford it to him. On the other hand, a priest might change his residence, and build a new temple, and yet carry his Thingmen with him. The possession of a temple and personal power were all that he needed as a title to his office. In this way, by the end of the period of occupation, a number of little kingdoms had been formed all round the coast of Iceland, ruled by the priests, who, at stated times, convened their adherents and retainers to meetings for the settlement of matters which concerned any or all of them. These were called “ Things”—Meetings.<a id="noteref-social-principles-19" href="#note-social-principles-19" epub:type="noteref"><sup>19</sup></a> Each was independent of the other, and quarrels between the members of two separate Things could only be settled, as the quarrels of nations are settled, by treaty or war. In these foreign relations, it was the Priest who represented the community, and treated with his brother priests to arrange matters ; but as yet they acknowledged no common bond of union, save that of race. An Icelandic state or commonwealth, in fact, did not exist.</p>
			</section>
			<hr/>
			<section id="social-principles-endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Notes</h3>
				<p id="note-social-principles-1"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-1">1</a> See for this part of the subject, an essay by the same hand in the Oxford Essays, 1858, The Norsemen in Iceland, to which it may be allowed once for all to refer for a fuller sketch of the mythology of the race, as well as for many other points which cannot even be touched on here for want of space.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-2"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-2">2</a> By some the whole custom of fostering has been supposed to have arisen out of this exposure of infants. However that may be,</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-3"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-3">3</a> By a strange anomaly, just as the parent stock of the North- men both in Norway and Iceland, but first of all in Iceland, were labouring, after the introduction of Christianity, to do away with duels, their offspring in Normandy were making it still more the keystone of their system of legislation. Thus wager of battle, which was dying out in England along with the right of private war, shot up into a new and legal existence, as an appeal to the Christians’ God, under the Anglo-Norman kings ; and so the right lingered down to very recent times a remnant of heathen belief, long after the principle involved in the right had been forced to do fresh duty in a religion not of war and bloodshedding, but of peace and mercy.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-4"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-4">4</a> Thus Illugi, the brother of Grettir the great outlaw, preferred death at the hands of his murderers rather than to swear an oath to forego the revenge which he was bound to take. Thorstein, another brother, follows the assassin to Byzantium, and there takes ample re- venge. In our Saga, Njal, otherwise so peaceful and forgiving, after he became a Christian, declares that he will not leave his burning house. “ I will not go out, for I am an old man, and little fitted to avenge my sons, but I will not live on in shame.” Ch. 127, vol. ii., p. 175.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-5"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-5">5</a> In the words of the Anglo-Saxon law, where the same system prevailed, he might either &quot; buy off the spear, or bear it.&quot;</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-6"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-6">6</a> In early times it seems to have been enough if the slayer left his weapon in the wound. &quot;That,&quot; says Gísli Súr's son's Saga, &quot;men called secret manslaughter (lönvig) but not murder, if men left their weapon sticking in the wound.&quot; Compare also Palnatoki's arrow with which he slew the Danish King Harold. The feeling here seems to be that the weapon well known to belong to the slayer was his mark that the deed had been done by him.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-7"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-7">7</a> See our Saga, ch. 88, vol. ii., p. 36, where Earl Hacon wishes to put Njal's sons to death at night, but Sweyn, his son, insists that it should be put off till daylight. Still more strongly in Egil's Saga, ch. 62, Ed. Reykjavík, when Gunhillda, the mother of King Eric</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-8"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-8">8</a> Fyrir ofriki Haralds konúngs; &quot;for the overbearing of King Harold&quot; are the words invariably used.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-9"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-9">9</a> See the Eyrbyggja Saga, where Thorolf Mostrarskegg tosses his pillars, on which the image of Thor was carved, over board, off Reykjaness, and follows and finds them to Hofsvogr (Templevoe), in the Breiðifjörðr (Broadfirth). It sometimes happened, that the pillars were not easily found; in that case a temporary abode was chosen, while the pillars were sought for. The search often lasted long; thus Ingolf, the first of all the settlers, only found his pillars after three whole years had passed; Lodmund again after three years; Hrollaugr in one; and Thord Skeggi, not until he had hunted for them for ten or fifteen years.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-10"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-10">10</a> “Ken the land :” kenna landit.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-11"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-11">11</a> At fara elldi um landit.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-12"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-12">12</a> Technically his landnám, his “landtaking,” from “at nema land;” whence also the early settlers were called landnámsmenn.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-13"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-13">13</a> It may be inferred that human sacrifices were not in high favour in Iceland, first from the fact that those suspected of prac- tising such rites, were in very bad repute. Thus, Vatndales Saga, new ed., p. 28, &quot;There was a man named Thorolf, and his nick- name was Hellblade (Anglice Rakehell); he was a very unfair man and very little loved. . . . He wrought much mischief in the country round . . . and it was much misdoubted that he must be a sacrificer of men; nor was there a man in all the Dales who</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-14"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-14">14</a> At mæla fyrir minni.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-15"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-15">15</a> At strengja heit. For the feeling about them comp. Hrafn- kell’s Saga, p. 8; Kjöbenh. 1847.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-16"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-16">16</a> See the strange story of the vows made by the Vikings of Jomsborg, which led to their invasion of Norway. Formn Saga.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-17"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-17">17</a> Or hæng, for the word is spelled in both ways. The meaning of the nickname is “trout,” and all the Kettles in that famous family of Ravensfood bore it from the time that their mythical ancestor, the first Kettle hæng, slew a great dragon, and when his father asked what he had done, said, “I’m not going to make a long story out of every fish I see leap, but true it is that I chopped a bull-trout</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-18"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-18">18</a> Landnáma, 5 ch. 12.</p>
				<p id="note-social-principles-19"><a href="#noteref-social-principles-19">19</a> Meeting is “ mot thing,” just as husting is “ house thing.” The one a public gathering of the freeholders of a district, the other a gathering of householders.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>