<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Chronology and Outline of the Story</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section epub:type="appendix">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Chronology and Outline of the Story</h2>
			</header>
			<h3>THE STORY.</h3>
			<p>We have now briefly shown the degrees of kinship in which the great families stood which play a principalpart in our story. When it begins, Mord the grandsonof Sighvat the red—or his son, if Sigmund is to dropfrom the family tree—was the greatest of all the chiefs in the south-west. Born about 910, he was in the height of his strength and influence when, about 940, he broughtabout the settlement which put an end to the bloody feudwhich had raged among the cousins on the Fleetlithe. The quarrel, which had begun by the thirst for revengefelt by his elder sister Thorgerda, ended with his bestowing the hand of Rannveiga the youngest on the sonof the man who had taken the lead against him; and in the birth of the peerless Gunnar we see the fruit of thatreconciliation. From that period he went on adding to his power. Mord was such a lawyer “that no judgmentswere thought lawful unless he had a hand in them.” He was so eloquent and sweet spoken that he was calledthe Fiddle. Though Rafn, the Speaker of the Law, Kettle hæng’s grandson, lived close to him at Hof, themother temple of the district, Mord is mentioned as oneof the greatest chiefs in the south country about 940,</p>
			<p>while no notice whatever is taken of Rafn. Ulfljót’scode was still young, and we may be sure that his wisehead had much to do with bringing it into workingorder. His lands were broad and fruitful, and his onlydaughter Unna, the best bred and most courteous ofwomen, might well be called the greatest match in allthe Vale country.</p>
			<p>Having said so much, the teller of the story, in order to clear the ground before him, rushes away to the west, to speak of the half-brothers Hauskuldand Hrut; of the stalwart father and the foresighteduncle, who, besides his gifts of wit, was one of the bestswordsmen of his time; and of the fair child withlong locks playing before them on the floor; and howthe father’s joy in the beauty and stature of his childwas marred by the prophecy of the uncle, who foresawthe wilful reckless character of the girl, who would stopat no wickedness to work her will, and foretold thedisgrace which she was about to bring upon her noblerace. No wonder that the brothers saw little of oneanother for a while after such a cruel utterance.*</p>
			<p>The ill seed which was to bear such a bitter crop soonbegan to spring up. Her father seems indeed to havedone everything to forward the fatal growth; tired withher wilful temper, he gave her away when a mere child, about 955, when she could not have been more thanfifteen years old, to a man whom she thought beneathher in rank. They lived together but one year, when Thiostolf’s pole-axe parted them. Her second match, which took place in 959, was more to her liking, andher father and uncle, warned by the fate of Thorwald, now let her betroth herself; but though she loved Glum, and behaved well at first, the old leaven shewed</p>
			<p>to bring the half-brothers as speedily as possible into the woof of histale, he breaks the chronological order, and tells of Hrut’s betrothalto Unna, his going abroad for his inheritance, his love passages with Gunhilda, his roving exploits, return home, marriage with, and parting from Unna, and his quarrel with Mord at the Althing, beforehe speaks Hallgerda’s marriages. But she was really married before Hrut went abroad, and was a widow the second time, and living at Laugarness when Hrut returned. Chapters ix. to xvii., both inclusive, ought therefore to come in between chapters i. and ii.; and the Saga then runs on, year for year, in unbroken chronological order, tillthe Change of Faith occurs, the chapters relating to which are, seemingly by mere carelessness of the copyist, misplaced in the original. Ithas been deemed right to restore them in the translation to their trueconnection; but as the chapters relating to Hallgerda’s marriagesseem to have been so placed by the Sagateller for a sufficient reason, they have been left as they stand in the original.</p>
			<p>itself as soon as Thiostolf the mischief-maker crossed Glum’s threshold; husband and wife quarrelled, and, again Thiostolf’s axe set Hallgerda free. Twice a widowand barely twenty, with much wealth which she had gotfrom her father and last husband, she remained singletill she was thirty-five. Meantime, much had passed in the family, Hrut was betrothed to Unna, Fiddle Mord’sdaughter, and went abroad 963, returned in 965, married Unna, was parted from her 968, disputed with herfather about her portion at the Althing, and challengedhim to fight in 969.* In 970, or perhaps in the following year, Gunnar of Lithend, who was born about 945, comes into the story; he took up his cousin Unna’scause, and forced Hrut to restore Unna’s goods. When Mord died, 970-71, the great lawyer of the south, anothergreater than he was ready to fill his place, this was Njal, the man round whom the whole story turns. He wasborn about 930-935, nor do we hear much about him, ashe was a man of peace and law, in a lawless blood-thirsty</p>
			<p>age, till we find him with his fame full grown, andhis weird foresight and legal skill acknowledged byall, about the time that Gunnar undertook his daringride to the west to learn how to summon Hrut from the lips of Hrut himself, 971. From that time to theday of his death, he was Gunnar's faithful friend; andthough he gave many men wholesome counsel, whichstood them in good stead in law suits and worldlybusiness, to no one did he feel himself more boundto afford help than to Gunnar. In 972, Gunnar goesabroad at Njal's advice—wins fame and wealth— returns 974—rides, as soon as he comes back, to the Althing against Njal's advice—falls in love with Hallgerda, who must have been about five years older thanhimself, he thirty and she thirty-five—makes up hisquarrel with Hrut and Hauskuld—marries the widow, and brings her home to Lithend. Njal's forebodings quickly came to pass. Hallgerdasoon quarrels with Bergthora, Njal's high-spirited, bravehearted wife. Now came a run of five years,* eachmarked by manslaughters committed by one houseagainst the other. It is all the womens work, and</p>
			<p>nothing can shake the friendship of Njal and Gunnar, who pay blood fine after blood fine for thrall, freedman, and kinsman, as the deeds of blood ascend in the socialscale, and are good friends again. Now we hear of Njal's sons, and the terrible Skarphedinn* stalks acrossthe stage with his axe, the ogress of war (Rimmugýgr),† uplifted to his shoulder. After Sigmund's death, whowas Gunnar's first cousin,‡ the heads of the houses saw</p>
			<p>little of one another, and there was coolness betweentheir families, till after three years Gunnar fell into astrait, out of which he required Njal’s help to set himfree. Then it was that the root of their old friendshipshot up into new life. There can be little doubt thatthis strait was that dastard’s deed which Hrut’s foresight had seen in the child’s eyes as Hallgerda playedabout on the floor. Now the thief’s eyes come out, and Hallgerda commits the housebreaking and fireraising at Otkell’s house at Kirkby. This happened in 982. True it was that Otkell was a weak and foolishman, made still more weak and foolish by the spitefulcounsel of the liar Skamkell, but he was, as we haveseen, a man of great family. The men of Mossfellwere near of kin to him, for he and Gizur the whitewere first cousins, and not Gizur alone, but Asgrim Ellidagrim’s son, and Geir the priest of Lithe werehis cousins also, so that Hallgerda’s wickedness, aidedby Otkell’s folly, raised up this mighty league againstthe matchless Gunnar. In 984 the suit for the theftwas settled at the Althing to Gunnar’s honour; nextspring, 985, Otkell rode over Gunnar as he was sowingin his field. A little after, just before the Althing, Gunnar slays Otkell and Skamkell by Rangriver. Atthe Althing Gunnar and Gizur the white strive. That</p>
			<p>same autumn Hauskuld Dale-Kolli's son dies a littleafter the birth of Thrain's son Hauskuld, afterwardsthe Whiteness priest.*</p>
			<p>In 986 Gunnar and Kolskegg and Hjort fight with the band of foes from the Threecorner, who fell upon them on his return from Tongue. In 987 the atonement was made at the Althing for the lives lost theyear before. In 988 Gunnar goes west to see Olaf, andhas Sam, the faithful hound, given him. In the nextyear he slays Thorgeir Otkell's son, and is banished at the Althing shortly after 989. In 990 Gunnar's house</p>
			<p>is attacked and he is slain. His two worst foes throughout his struggles were Hallgerda his wife and Mord hiscousin.*</p>
			<p>With Gunnar's death the first fitte of the Saga ends. Of that portion the matchless champion Gunnar, theman whom all alike loved, whose heart was so good, and whose arm was so strong, is rather the hero than Njal. In the second, as the Seer foretold, the troubles</p>
			<p>which had befallen Gunnar were turned against him andhis house. By this time Njal’s sons were all married ; but thelove of foreign travel had come over two of them, Helgiand Grim, just when Gunnar was banished. At the sametime Thrain Sigfus’ son went abroad. Njal’s sons wereaway five winters, the first three they spent in Orkney, 989-992. In the last of those years, Thrain left Norway for Orkney, soon after Helgi and Grim came thither, and the Saga can best tell what wrongs they suffered for his sake. After they left Norway, where they had met with sucha sorry welcome, they returned to their friend Earl Sigurd in the Orkneys with Kari, who had twice savedtheir lives, and who was ever after their bosom friend. Two years more, 992-994, they stayed there, returningto Iceland in the last of those years, and bringing Kari, soon to be their brother-in-law, with them. In Iceland two years, 994-996, passed before Skarphedinnslew Thrain. Now comes the Change of Faith. In 997 Thangbrand went out to convert the Icelanders by the swordrather than the word. That winter he spent with Hallof the Side at Thvattwater.* Early next spring Thang-</p>
			<p>brand set out on his journey west. In the same yearhe slew Weatherlid the Skald on Fleetlithe, Thorwaldthe scurvy, and several others ; but he had bad successat the Althing, and went west to Gest's house at Hagion Bardarstrand. The next year, 999, Hjallti Skeggi'sson was outlawed for blasphemy, and meantime he and Gizur had gone abroad to Norway. There they pledgethemselves to King Olaf Tryggvason to carry out what Thangbrand, who returned in that year, having againspent a winter with Hall of the Side, had so signallyfailed to accomplish. In 1000 they set sail, and make Iceland just in time to reach the Althing. There Thorgeir of Lightwater, who had the Speakership of the Law, was won over by Hall of the Side, and perhaps by his own convictions, to bring Christianity &quot;into the Law,&quot; as it was called ; and though the heathen party murmured, the change met with no verygreat opposition. On the 24th of June 1000, for we canname the very day, Iceland passed from heathendom to Christianity, and the meekness of Hall of the Side, thesound reasoning of Snorri the priest,* and the common</p>
			<p>sense and public spirit of Thorgeir the Speaker effectedwhat all the duels and bloodshedding of Thangbrand and Gudleif could never bring about. After this episode we return to our story. At thetime that his father Thrain was slain, Hauskuld waseleven years old. The winter after, he passed from Kettle of the Mark's house to that of Njal. He was now Njal's foster-child, and Njal soon loved him more thanhis own sons.* Now things are quiet, and there is alull in the story while Hauskuld grows up under thetender care of Njal. In 1004 the noble lad was nineteen, and Njal's eyes had already, two years before, searched the country far and wide for a fitting wife forhim. He found her away east at Swinefell, in Hildigunna Starkad's daughter; and here Flosi her uncle comes into the story—Flosi, the man of noble heart and good intentions, whom fate and the duty of revenge led headlonginto crimes of the blackest dye. But Hildigunna, theproud-hearted maiden, would wed no one who had not a</p>
			<p>gods are wroth at such speeches as we have heard.' Then Snorrithe priest spoke and said—' At what, then, were the gods wrothwhen this lava was molten, and ran over the spot on which we nowstand?'&quot;</p>
			<p>leadership over men; she must have a priest for herhusband. Priesthoods might be bought and sold, butpriesthoods were not often in the market, and so Njal’slegal cunning, as the Saga tells us, was driven to thedevice of making new priesthoods all over the land, that his foster-child might fill one of them. We willgo into this story more at length further on, but for the present we take the tale as we find it, and pass onto say that in 1004 the Fifth Court was established at the Althing; that Hauskuld, now the Whiteness priest, filled one of the new priesthoods; and that Hildigunnawas married to a priest, according to the dearest wish ofher heart. Now all things looked prosperous. Njal, an oldman past seventy, might reasonably look forward to apeaceful end, leaving his sons, men of more than forty, to inherit his land and goods. He had looked forwardwith an insight which it was believed few men possessed; and what he saw, as he had told Gunnar long before, was that his end would be the last that any man couldhave guessed. Hauskuld had been settled in his own house at Ossaby, in the Landisles, close by his foster-father forabout two years, when the brutal murder of Hauskuld, Njal’s base-born son, by Lyting and his brothers took</p>
			<p>place; this we put in the year 1006. The quarrel wassettled much to Lyting's loss, partly by Skarphedinn'saxe, and partly by Njal's stern award. But it wouldhave been better for Lyting if he had left that part of the country at Njal's solemn warning. Three yearsafter, at the Thingskala Thing, the blind son of the slainman avenged himself, not certainly in the miraculousway in which the story has come down to us, tamperedwith by monkish hands for the edification of the faithfulof that age, and for the amusement of the unbelievers ofthis. This was in the year 1009, and the same summer Valgard the guileful came back to Iceland and diedshortly after.</p>
			<p>We have almost forgotten the great marplot of ourpiece. The Iago of this Icelandic tragedy, Mord Valgard's son, was now in the full venom of his nature, andhis guileful father, the stubborn heathen, too old toconform, like his crafty child, to the new faith, was stilltrue to his nature. He had handed over to his son twopriesthoods and two temples; his own at Hof, the mothertemple of the district, in the heart of old Kettlebjörn'slot, and the one at the Vale, which Fiddle Mord hadowned, and which he took in right of his wife. What wasthe meaning, then, of the ruin he saw among the boothsaround his Thing-field, and of the buildings in progress,</p>
			<p>and the foundations of booths laid at Whiteness? Hemight well say “he did not know the country for thesame.” The reason given by his son was not likelyto give the old pagan peace on his deathbed. Heacted up to his principles, he thirsted for revenge, andhe took it in the way best suited to the treacherousspirit which filled the breast of both father and sonalike. With his dying breath he bequeathed an inheritance of guileful slander to his son, and the bequestwas soon put out to interest. Mord was a worthyexecutor to his father’s will. In the noble nature of Haukuld all Mord’s poisoned shafts were quenched —his mind was too pure to listen to scandal. With Njal’s sons the tempter was more successful. Skarphedinn’s jealous temper was soon on fire. He saw everbefore him the son eager to avenge his father; his impetuous spirit led on his brothers, and Kari followedthem as he was bound. But even with them thispoison took months to work, and, indeed, Valgard’scrafty counsel to Mord had been to make himself goodfriends with both sides before he began to slander eitherof them. At last, after about a year and a half, theslanderer had his way. In 1011, Mord followed Skarphedinn and his brothers and Kari one early spring morning to Ossaby. There they found Haukuld already up,</p>
			<p>and busy sowing corn in his ploughed field. They all, the traitor and all, gave him wounds, Skarphedinn dealingthe deathblow, and the fate of Njal and his family wassealed. At the Althing, in the same year, 1011, theaward, which had cost so much trouble, was set atnaught by the taunts of Flosi and the bitternessof Skarphedinn. That very autumn, on a Monday nightin August, the Burners, 120 in number, worked theirwicked will at Bergthorsknoll, and not a man of thatfamous family was left alive to take revenge but thegallant Kari, who leapt unheeded from the flames. Itwas well taken. Worsted at law on the Althing in 1012, by the heedlessness of Mord, who thus spoils whatwould otherwise have been a winning case, the avengers of Njal are only too ready to seize their arms. Now it is their turn ; now they, and not the Burners, are victorious. After the fight Flosi and the Burners are banished ; Flosi for three years, some of therest for ever. But Kari and Thorgeir Craggeir Njal'sfirst cousin, mindful of Skarphedinn, will take noatonement. Both at first, and Kari alone afterwards, pursue the Burners and slay fifteen of them. Flosi goesabroad in 1013, but only to be followed by Kari, whoovertakes and slays one of his band at the very boardof Sigurd the great Earl of Orkney on Christmas-day.</p>
			<p>The year after, 1014, comes Brian’s Battle, the greatfight at Clontarf, so bloody and so utterly withoutresult, that the same King Sigtrygg, who had led the hostagainst the noble “Monarch of the Tribute,” held Dublinafter the battle which he had lost, just as he held itbefore. The Northman dynasty in Dublin was destinedonly to fall before kindred blood. Here fifteen more of the Burners lose their lives; Flosi sets out on his pilgrimage, but lingers a while in Wales. As soon as Kari hearsthis he follows him up thither, slays Kol Thorstein’s son, the worst of all the band. With this deed the measure of his wrath is full. Now he too will set out for Romefor the absolution of his sins, yet he stays with Earl Malcolm in Galloway. Flosi has a year’s start of him, reaches Rome in the summer of 1014, returns to Norway the next year, 1015, stays there the winter afterwith the Earl, and returns a thoroughly reconciled manto Iceland in 1016, having fulfilled his three years ofbanishment. In that year Kari reaches Rome in timeto get back to Caithness for the winter. While hewinters there his wife dies out in Iceland. In thesummer after, 1017, he was late in getting to sea, iswrecked under Ingolf’s Head at Flosi’s door, seeks hishospitality in a storm, and is nobly welcomed. Aftera thorough atonement, Kari marries Hildigunna the</p>
			<p>proud, and lives happily. In his old age Flosi is lostat sea, and thus ends the Story of Burnt Njal.</p>
			<p>After this outline of the story, we turn to the dailylife in Iceland at the end of the tenth century ; and first, let us look a little at the way in which these Icelanderswere housed. In the tenth century the homesteads of the Icelanders consisted of one main building, in whichthe family lived by day and slept at night, and of outhouses for offices and farm-buildings,* all opening on ayard. Sometimes these outbuildings touched the mainbuilding, and had doors which opened into it, but inmost cases they stood apart, and for purposes of defence, no small consideration in those days, each might belooked upon as a separate house.†</p>
			<p>THE HOUSE—THE SKÁLI. xcix</p>
			<p>The main building of the house was the stof a, orsitting and sleeping room. In the abodes of chiefs andgreat men, this building had great dimensions, and wasthen called a skáli, or hall. It was also called eldhús, or eldáskáli, from the great fires which burned in it.* or touched the hall (eldhús), which is wrongly translated “kitchen” in the Saga. See also ch. 76, I. 243, where Gunnar’s foes attackhim from the outhouses. The buildings which formed the roomsof an early Icelandic house may therefore be considered as separateerections.</p>
			<p>c THE ICELANDIC HOUSE.</p>
			<p>Of such a hall we have given plans, which will enablethe reader fully to understand its arrangement ; it had</p>
			<p>room at Ossaby, and spurned the high seat set for him on the pallor dais. In this, and in the account that follows, when it is saidthat Hildigunna went in and out of the stof a while Flosi was at hismeal, and that she went back into the hall or skáli and unlockedher chests, and brought back the cloak into the stof a, the writer hadplainly in his eye the arrangement of the skáli usual in his time, and distinguishes between the stof a cut off from the skáli at the pallor dais, and the skáli itself; but in earlier times the terms skáli andstof a seem to have been synonymous. Again, in later times, eldhúswas used for kitchen, as in Sturlúnga, 4, 50, and this has causedthe transcriber of the Fóstbræðra Saga, Kph., 1852, pp. 96, to makea distinction between it and the stof a, when he says that Thormóð'swounds had so far healed that he was able to walk from the stof a, sitting-room, to the eldhús, kitchen. So, again, even in Egil's Saga, ch. 46, p. 92, Reykjavík, 1856, eldaskáli is clearly used for kitchen ; for at a feast it is said, &quot; When Egil came to the homestead, he sawthat the serving-men were going from the kitchen with dishes, andwere carrying them into the stof a (frá eldaskála með skutildiska okbáru inn í stufuna). There was a great fire in the kitchen, andkettles over it.&quot; Where the context shows that the two were separate buildings. In the tenth century, then, stof a, eldhús or eldaskáli, and skáli, all meant the same thing,—the main building of thehomestead, in which the whole family sat by day and slept by night. The kitchen in those days was not called eldhús, but soðhús, seething-house; the word occurs in Kormak's Saga, ch. 4. A centuryor two after, it is called eldhús, and it is still so called in Iceland at the present day. When Grágás says, I. 459, 4to ed., &quot; Hús eruok þrjú í hvers manns híbýlum, eitt er stof a, annat eldhús, ok iiibúr.&quot; &quot; There are three houses in every man's abode, a sitting-room,</p>
			<p>PLATE 1.</p>
			<p>Dansk Alin or Danish Ells</p>
			<p>a High Seat on the Lower Bench (Ondvegi á hinn úæðra bekk) b High Seat on the Upper Bench (Ondvegi a hinn æðra bekk) c High Seat on the Dais or Cross Bench (Ondvegi á palli) d Hearths on which the Fires were lightede Table on which the Drinking Cups stoodf Doors of the Halln Tables (Borð) o Benches</p>
			<p>OF THE OLD ICELANDIC SKÁLI OR HALL.</p>
			<p>t E. about two English Feet</p>
			<p>g Passagesh Porch or outer Hall (Andyri, Forskáli) i Store-rooms for Ale and Foodk The Pillar-door, or Man's-door. The Main Door of the House (Karldyrr or Brandadyrr) l The Lower Door for Women and Servants (Kvennadyrr) m Shut Beds (Lokrekkjur) with chairs and tables for the Heads of the Familyn Bekkr p Stools (Forsæti) o A wainscot Pannelling run all round the Hall between the pillars of the Navep Women slept in the recesses of the passage behind the Dais</p>
			<p>Bartholomew, sc Edinr</p>
			<p>Mac, Edinburgh</p>
			<p>SECTION LENGTHWAYS OF THE OLD ICELANDIC SKÁLI OR HALL.</p>
			<p>Bartholomew sc Edinr</p>
			<p>J. G. F. del. Reykjavik</p>
			<p>two doors, the man’s or maindoor (karldyrr),* and thewomen’s or lesser door (kvennadyrr). Each of thesedoors opened into a porch of its own, andyri, which wasoften wide enough, in the case of that into which themen’s door opened, as we see in Thrain’s house at Gritwater, to allow many men to stand in it abreast. It wassometimes called forskáli. Internally the hall consistedof three divisions, a nave and two low side aisles. Thewalls of these aisles were of stone, and low enough toallow of their being mounted with ease, as we see happened both with Gunnar’s skáli, and with Njal’s. Thecentre division or nave on the other hand, rose high abovethe others on two rows of pillars. It was of timber, andhad an open work timber roof. The roofs of the sideaisles were supported by posts as well as by rafters andcrossbeams leaning against the pillars of the nave. Itwas on one of these cross-beams, after it had fallen downfire-house, and store-house ;” and then goes on to say that if a manhave both eldhús and skáli, he shall choose at the spring meetingwhich shall be insured in case of fire by the community, it speaksof a time when skáli and eldhús were both buildings of the samekind, while stof a was distinguished from them. The provisionclearly was meant to guard the community against the expense ofrestoring two buildings of the same kind, one of which, in the eyesof the law, was superfluous.</p>
			<p>from the burning roof, that Kari got on to the side walland leapt out, while Skarphedinn, when the burnt beamsnapped asunder under his weight, was unable to followhim. There were fittings of wainscot along the wallsof the side aisles, and all round between the pillars of the inner row, supporting the roof of the nave, ran awainscot pannel (þili). In places the wainscot was piercedby doors opening into sleeping places shut off from therest of the hall on all sides for the heads of the family (lokrekkjur).* In other parts of the passages were sleep-</p>
			<p>ing places and beds not so shut off, for the rest of thehousehold. The women servants slept in the passagebehind the dais at one end of the hall. Over some hallsthere were upper chambers or lofts, in one of which Gunnar of Lithend slept, and from which he made hisfamous defence. We have hitherto treated only of the passages andrecesses of the side aisles. The whole of the navewith in the wainscot, between the inner round pillars, was filled by the hall properly so called. It had longhearths for fires in the middle, with louvres above to letout the smoke. On either side nearest to the wainscot, and in some cases touching it, was a row of benches (bekk); in each of these was a high seat (öndvegi),*</p>
			<p>throat, and wakes him. Then Gísli lifted the bedclothes off himwith one hand, but with the other hand he thrusts the spearthrough him, and pins him to the bedding. Then Thordísa callsout, ‘ Wake up, ye men in the hall, my husband Thorgrim isslain!’”</p>
			<p>if the hall was that of a great man, that on the southside being the owner's seat. Before these seats weretables, boards (borð), which, however, do not seem, anymore than our early middle age tables, to have beengöfgasti maðr ok sá er gamall var ok vitr, var kallaðr konúngsráðgjafi — — en þessi maðr sat á hinn norðra pall gagnvartkonúngi, ok hét þat hit úæðra öndvegi; voru nú enn konur tilhægri handar honum, en á vinstri hönd karlar.”—“ It was thecustom of old time in Norway and in Denmark, and also in Sweden, that, where there were kings' houses and feasting-halls, therewere doors at both ends of the hall, but the king's high-seat wason the middle of that long-bench which was on the side of thesun (i. e., on the south side). There the queen sat on the king'sleft hand, and that was then called ‘ öndvegi,’ and on eitherhand, he or she of men or women who sat nearest to the ‘ öndvegi’ had the most honourable seat, but he or she the leasthonourable that sat nearest to the doors. The noblest man, andhe who was both old and wise, was called the king's councillor (ráðgjafi), but that man sat on the north bench over againstthe king, and that was called the lower ‘ öndvegi.’ And nowaga in the women were on his (the councillor's) right hand, and the men on his left.” It appears from this description that the men and women oneach side of the hall sat opposite to one another. This, thoughtrue of great ladies in kings' halls in the days of Magnus thequiet, at the end of the eleventh century, was not true of the Icelandic housewives in Njal's time, who always sat, if they satat all, on the dais at the east end of the hall. Sometimes, insteadof using the term “ öndvegi” at all, it is simply said that the chiefsat “ on mid bench,” “ á miðjum bekk,” and the men on eitherside of him “ outwards,” towards the west end, or “ inwards” towards the dais, at the east end of the hall.</p>
			<p>always kept standing, but were brought in with, andcleared away after each meal. On ordinary occasions, one row of benches on each side sufficed; but when therewas a great feast, or a sudden rush of unbidden guests, as when Flosi paid his visit to Tongue to take down Asgrim’s pride, a lower kind of seats, or stools (forsæti) were brought in, on which the men of lowest rank sat, and which were on the outside of the tables, nearest to the fire. At the end of the hall, over against the door, was a raised platform or dais (pall), on which also wassometimes a high seat and benches. It was where thewomen sat at weddings, as we see from the account of Hallgerda’s wedding, in our Saga, and from many otherpassages. In later times the seat of honour was shifted from the upper bench to the dais; and this seems to havebeen the case occasionally with kings and earls in Njal’stime, if we may judge from the passage in the Saga, where Hildigunna fits up a high seat on the dais for Flosi, which he spurns from under him with the words, thathe was “neither king nor earl,” meaning that he was asimple man, and would have nothing to do with any ofthose new fashions.* It was to the dais that Asgrim</p>
			<p>betook himself when Flosi paid him his visit, and unless Asgrim’s hall was much smaller than we have anyreason to suppose would be the case in the dwelling ofso great a chief, Flosi must have eaten his meal not farfrom the dais, in order to allow of Asgrim’s getting nearenough to aim a blow at him with a poleaxe from therail at the edge of the platform. On high days and feastdays, part of the hall was hung with tapestry (tjöldir, refill), often of great worth and beauty, and over thehangings all along the wainscot, were carvings such asthose which Laxdæla* tells us Olaf the peacock had cutfor his great hall at Hjarðarholt, and those which our Saga tells us Thorkel Foulmouth had carved on the stoolthe king in his high seat on the upper bench, and has two others, one on each side, for Earl Gilli and himself. In much later timesthis fashion seems to have been kept up in Orkney. See the accountof Earl Paul’s hall at Orfir. Orkn. Saga. New edition, ch. 70, vol.</p>
			<p>THE DYNGJA OR LADIES’ BOWER. cvii</p>
			<p>before his high seat and over his shut bed, in memoryof those deeds of “ derring do” which he had performedin foreign lands. Against the wainscot in various parts of the hall, shields and weapons were hung up. It was the sound of Skarphedinn’s axe against the wainscot that woke up Njal and brought him out of his shut bed, when hissons set out on their hunt after Sigmund the white and Skiolld. Now let us pass out of the Skáli by either door, andcast our eyes at the high gables with their carved projections, and we shall understand at a glance how it wasthat Mord’s counsel to throw ropes round the ends of the timbers, and then to twist them tight with levers androllers, could only end, if carried out, in tearing thewhole roof off the house. It was then much easierwork for Gunnar’s foes to mount up on the side-roofsas the Easterling, who brought word that his bill was at home, had already done, and thence to attack himin his sleeping loft with safety to themselves, after hisbow-string had been cut. Some homesteads, like those of Gunnar at Lithend, and Gisli and his brother at Hol in Hawkdale, in the West Firths, had bowers (dyngja pl. dyngjur), ladies’ chambers, where the women sat and span, and where,</p>
			<h3>THE DYNGJA OR LADIES’ BOWER</h3>
			<p>in both the houses that we have named, gossip andscandal was talked with the worst results.* These</p>
			<p>THE DYNGJA OR LADIES’ BOWER. cix</p>
			<p>bowers stood away from the other buildings. It was inone of them, unless the word there means “cairn,” that Daurud saw the Valkyries at work on the Woof of War. In very early times this dyngia was called búr, the original of our “bower.” So, for instance, in Sæ- mund’s Edda, it is said of Brynhilda, that she í búriborða vakti; and Gudruna says, “I was a maid of maids, my mother reared me bright in bower” (björt í búri); In the Danish Kæmpeviser, or heroic ballads too, aswell as in our own minstrelsy, the distinction betweenbower and hall; the one as the men’s, the other as thewomen’s abode, was long kept up. But in Iceland the</p>
			<p>to speak again—‘Ill often comes of women’s gossip,’ said she, ‘andso it may be that very great harm may come of this, and now let ustake counsel about it.’ ‘Oh!’ said Asgerda, ‘I have thought of a plan which will be sure to answer.’ ‘What is that?’ asks Auð. ‘I will throw my arms round my husband’s, Thorkell’s neck, whenwe go to bed this night, and be as bonny and buxom as ever I canto him, and then his heart will change, and so he will forgive me. And I will tell him that this was all a lie that we have been chattering about, and that there is no truth in it. But if thou thinkestthat he will not listen to me, pray tell me what to do, and what wiltthou do thyself?’ ‘I will soon tell thee,’ said Auð; ‘I will tellmy husband Gísli the whole truth as to what I need to have counselabout, whether it be good or ill, and then he will be sure to give megood advice, for I am sure it will be best for me.’” We need not saythat Asgerda does not persuade her lazy husband that there is notruth in women’s gossip. Vestein is slain, and a bloody feud follows.</p>
			<p>word seems to have lost this meaning quite as early asthe settlement. In all the Sagas relating to Icelanddyngja is used for the woman's bower, while búr or útibúr means the safe or storehouses in which provisionsand sometimes things of more value were kept. Bothdyngja and búr, at the time of which we write, were outlying buildings away from the skáli.</p>
			<p>Every Icelandic homestead was approached by astraight road (geil, geilar) which led up to the yardround which the main building and its outhouses andfarm buildings stood. This was fenced in on each sideby a wall of stones or turf. Near the house stood the &quot;town&quot; or home fields where meadow hay was grown, andin favoured positions where corn would grow, there werealso enclosures of arable land near the house.* On the</p>
			<p>FLOCKS AND HERDS AND HAY. cxi</p>
			<p>uplands and marshes more hay was grown. Hay wasthe great crop in Iceland ; for the large studs of horsesand great herds of cattle that roamed upon the hillsand fells in summer needed fodder in the stable andbyre in winter, when they were brought home. As for the flocks of sheep, they seem to have been reckonedand marked every autumn, and milked and shorn insummer ; but to have fought it out with nature on the hillside all the year round as they best could. Hay, therefore, was the main staple, and hay-makingthe great end and aim of an Icelandic farmer. Wehave seen already how Gísli set every one to work ona good drying day, and Gunnar's death in our Saga may</p>
			<p>Corn grew in Iceland in old times just as wood grew there, and woodbig enough to build a few ships, and abundantly enough to be usedin charcoal burning. It was not so long ago that land in the Orkneyswas thought unfit to grow grain, but this delusion has disappearedbefore a better system of cultivation, brought in by Mr. Balfour of Balfour and Trenaby, who is as great in his way as Earl Sigurd; and the same thing would, in all probability, happen in Iceland. Atpresent the only grain grown in Iceland seems to be the wild oat (mel), Elymus avenarius, which flourishes abundantly on the sandson the south-east of the island, on the very same spot, in fact, whereour Saga tells us Kari and Bjorn, after taking vengeance on the sonsof Sigfus, cut the wild oats for their horses, lest they should starveon those sands barren of all else. Olafsen and Povelsen, in their &quot; Journey through Iceland,&quot; mention that wheat would grow in their time, nearly one hundred years ago, at Lithend.</p>
			<p>be set down to the fact that all his men were away in the Landisles finishing their haymaking. Again, Flosi, before the Burning, bids all his men go home and makean end of their haymaking, and when that is over, tomeet and fall on Njal and his sons. Even the great dutyof revenge gives way to the still more urgent duty ofproviding fodder for the winter store. Hayneed, to runshort of hay (at vera í heyþroti), was the greatest misfortune that could befall a man, who with a fine herd andstud, might see both perish before his eyes in winter. Then it was that men of open heart and hand, like Gunnar, helped their tenants and neighbours, often, aswe see in Gunnar's case, till they had neither hay norfood enough left for their own household, and had tobuy or borrow from those that had. Then, too, it wasthat the churl's nature came out in Otkell and others, who having enough and to spare, would not part with their abundance for love or money.*</p>
			<p>HARD WORKERS AND EARLY RISERS. cxiii</p>
			<p>These men were no idlers. They worked hard, andall, high and low, worked. In no land does the dignityof labour stand out so boldly. The greatest chiefs sowand reap, and drive their sheep, like Glum, the Speaker’sbrother, from the fells. The mightiest warriors werethe handiest carpenters and smiths. Gísli Súr’s sonknew every corner of his foeman’s house, because hehad built it with his own hands while they were goodfriends. Njal’s sons are busy at armourer’s work, likethe sons of the mythical Ragnar before them, when thenews comes to them that Sigmund has made a mock of them in his songs. Gunnar sows his corn with hisarms by his side, when Otkell rides over him; and Hauskuld the Whiteness priest is doing the same workwhen he is slain. To do something, and to do it well, was the Icelander’s aim in life, and in no land does laziness like that of Thorkell meet with such well deservedreproach. They were early risers and went early tobed, though they could sit up late if need were. Theythought nothing of long rides before they broke their fast.</p>
			<p>burnt, house and all. That was the great case of fire-raising before Njal’s time, and the feud which followed it, gave rise, as we havealready seen, to the establishment of new arrangements as to thetrial of suits in local courts, as well as to the establishment of the Quarter Thiugs.</p>
			<p>Their first meal was at about seven o'clock (dagverðr) and though they may have taken a morsel of food duringthe day, we hear of no other regular daily meal tillevening, when between seven and eight again they hadsupper (máttmál, night-meal).* While the men labouredon the farm or in the smithy, threw nets for fish in theteeming lakes and rivers, or were otherwise at workduring the day, the women, and the housewife, or mistress of the house, at their head, made ready the food for the meals, carded wool, and sewed or wove or span.† Atmeal-time the food seems to have been set on the board</p>
			<h3>MEALS AND FEASTS. CXV</h3>
			<p>by the women, who waited on the men, and at greatfeasts, such as Gunnar’s wedding, the wives of his nearestkinsman, and of his dearest friend. Thorhillda Skaldtongue, Thrain’s wife, and Bergthora Njal’s wife, wentabout from board to board waiting on the guests.*</p>
			<p>In everyday life they were a simple sober people, early to bed and early to rise—ever struggling with therigour of the climate. On great occasions, as at the Yule feasts in honour of the gods, held at the temples, or at “ arvel ” “ heir-ale,” feasts, when heirs drank themselves into their father’s land and goods, or at theautumn feasts, which friends and kinsmen gave to oneanother, there was no doubt great mirth and jollity, much eating and hard drinking of mead and freshbrewed ale;† but these drinks are not of a very headykind, and one glass of spirits in our days would send aman farther on the road to drunkenness than many ahorn of foaming mead. They were by no means that</p>
			<p>race of drunkards and hard livers which some have seenfit to call them. Nor were these people such barbarians as some havefancied, to whom it is easier to rob a whole people ofits character by a single word than to take the pains toinquire into its history. They were bold warriors andbolder sailors. The voyage between Iceland and Norway, or Iceland and Orkney, was reckoned as nothing ; butfrom the west firths of Iceland, Eric the Red—no ruffianas he has been styled, though he had committed an act ofmanslaughter—discovered Greenland ; and from Greenland the hardy seafarers pushed on across the main, tillthey made the dreary coast of Labrador. Down that they ran until they came at last to Vínland hit góði, Vineland the good, which took its name from thegrapes that grew there. From the accounts givenof the length of the days in that land, it is now theopinion of those best fitted to judge on such matters,* that this Vineland was no other than some part of the North American continent near Rhode Island or Massachussets, in the United States. Their ships werehalf-decked, high out of the water at stem and stern, low in the waist, that the oars might reach the water, for they were made for rowing as well as for sailing. The</p>
			<p>SHIPS OF BURDEN AND WAR SHIPS. cxvii</p>
			<p>after-part had a poop (lypting). The fore-part seems tohave been without deck, but loose planks were laidthere for men to stand on. A distinction was madebetween long-ships or ships of war, made long for speed, and merchant ships or byrðings, ships of burden, whichwere built to carry cargo. The common complementwas thirty rowers, which in war-ships made sometimes a third and sometimes a sixth of the crew. All round the warships, before the fight began, shieldwas laid on shield, on a rim or rail, which ran allround the bulwarks, presenting a mark like the hammocks of our navy, by which a long-ship could be atonce detected.* The bulwarks in warships could beheightened at pleasure, and this was called “to girdlethe ship for war.” The merchant ships often carriedheavy loads of meal and timber from Norway, andmany a one of these half-decked yawls no doubtfoundered, like Flosi’s unseaworthy ship, under theweight of her heavy burden of beams and planks, when overtaken by the autumnal gales on that wild sea. The passages were often very long, more than one hundreddays is sometimes mentioned as the time spent on avoyage between Norway and Iceland.</p>
			<p>As soon as the ship reached the land, she ran intosome safe bay or creek, the great landing places on thesouth and south-east coasts being Eyrar, “The Eres,” assuch spots are still called in some parts of the British Isles, that is, the sandy beaches opening into laguneswhich line the shore of the marsh district called Flói ; and Hornfirth, whence Flosi and the Burners put tosea after their banishment. There the ship was laidup in a slip (naust), made for her, she was stripped andmade snug for the winter, a roof of planks being probably thrown over her, while the lighter portions of hercargo were carried on pack-saddles up the country. Thetimber seems to have been floated up the firths andrivers as near as it could be got to its destination, and then dragged by trains of horses to the spot where it was to be used.</p>
			<p>Some of the cargo, the meal, and cloth, and arms, was wanted at home; some of it was sold to neighbourseither for ready money or on trust, it being usual to askfor the debt either in coin or in kind, the spring after.* Sometimes the account remained outstanding for a much</p>
			<p>RELATIONS BETWEEN THE SEXES. cxix</p>
			<p>longer time. Among these men whose hands were soswift to shed blood, and in that state of things whichlooks so lawless, but which in truth was based uponfixed principles of justice and law, the rights of property were so safe, that men like Njal went lendingtheir money to overbearing fellows like Starkad under Threecorner for years, on condition that he should paya certain rate of interest. So also Gunnar had goodsand money out at interest, out of which he wished tosupply Unna’s wants. In fact the law of debtor andcreditor, and of borrowing money at usance, was wellunderstood in Iceland, from the very first day that the Northmen set foot on its shores.</p>
			<p>If we examine the condition of the sexes in thisstate of society, we shall find that men and women metvery nearly on equal terms. If any woman is shockedto read how Thrain Sigfus’ son treated his wife, in parting from her, and marrying a new one, at a moment’swarning, she must be told that Gudruna, in Laxdæla, threatened one of her three husbands with much thesame treatment, and would have put her threat intoexecution if he had not behaved as she commanded him. In our Saga, too, the gudewife of Bjorn the boasterthreatens him with a separation if he does not standfaithfully by Kari; and in another Saga of equal age</p>
			<p>and truthfulness, we hear of one great lady who partedfrom her husband, because, in playfully throwing apillow of down at her, he unwittingly struck herwith his finger. In point of fact, the customary lawallowed great latitude to separations, at the will ofeither party, if good reason could be shown for thedesired change. It thought that the worst serviceit could render to those whom it was intended toprotect would be to force two people to live togetheragainst their will, or even against the will of onlyone of them, if that person considered him or herself, as the case might be, ill-treated or neglected. Gunnarno doubt could have separated himself from Hallgerdafor her thieving, just as Hallgerda could have partedfrom Gunnar for giving her that slap in the face ; butthey lived on, to Gunnar’s cost and Hallgerda’s infamy. In marriage contracts the rights of brides, like Unna thegreat heiress of the south-west, or Hallgerda the flower of the western dales, were amply provided for. In thelatter case it was a curious fact that this wicked womanretained possession of Laugarness, near Reykjavik, whichwas part of her second husband Glum’s property, to herdying day, and there, according to constant tradition, she was buried in a cairn which is still shown at the presenttime, and which is said to be always green, summer and</p>
			<p>MARRIAGE AND DEATH. cxxi</p>
			<p>winter alike.* Where marriages were so much matter ofbarter and bargain, the father’s will went for so much andthat of the children for so little, love matches werecomparatively rare ; and if the songs of Gunnlaugrsnaketongue and Kormak have described the charmsof their fair ones, and the warmth of their passion inglowing terms, the ordinary Icelandic marriage of thetenth century was much more a matter of business, in the first place, than of love. Though strong affection may have sprung up afterwards between husbandand wife, the love was rather a consequence of the marriage than the marriage a result of the love. When death came it was the duty of the next of kinto close the eyes and nostrils† of the departed, and our Saga, in that most touching story of Rodny’s behaviourafter the death of her son Hauskuld, affords an instanceof the custom. When Njal asks why she, the mother, as next of kin, had not closed the eyes and nostrils of the corpse, the mother answers, “ That duty I meant for Skarphedinn.” Skarphedinn then performs the duty,</p>
			<p>and, at the same time, undertakes the duty of revenge. In heathen times the burial took place on a “how” orcairn, in some commanding position near the abode of the dead, and now came another duty. This was thebinding on of the “ hellshoes,” which the deceased wasbelieved to need in heathen times on his way either to Valhalla’s bright hall of warmth and mirth, or to Hell’sdark realm of cold and sorrow. That duty over, thebody was laid in the cairn with goods and arms, sometimes as we see was the case with Gunnar in a sittingposture ; sometimes even in a ship, but always in achamber formed of baulks of timber or blocks of stone, over which earth and gravel were piled.*</p>
			<p>PUBLIC LIFE. cxxiii</p>
			<h3>PUBLIC LIFE AND THE ALTHING.</h3>
			<p>With regard to what may be called their public life, the commonwealth had many claims on the freeman’stime. Every freeman was naturally bound to be presentat the local things, and even at the Althing. In asystem of jurisprudence where so much was thrownupon the community, and the State as a body took solittle on itself; where there were comparatively so fewfreemen, and where the system required so much evidence on oath, it would have been no easy matter for the priests to name men to serve as judges, or forplaintiffs and defendants to find neighbours to bear witness or to sit on the inquests in the Quarter Courts at the Althing, unless a great body of those fit to fulfil</p>
			<p>brother-in-law,’ says he, ‘to bind hellshoon on the feet of menere they are laid in the cairn’—for it was then said that theyshould fare to Hell when they were dead; and that is why wehave a saying that that man is thought to be busking himselffor Hell who clothes himself much, or is long in clothing himself when he goes out—‘and now I will do this for Vestein,’ says Thorgrim, ‘and bind the hellshoon on his feet.’ But whenhe had made an end of that work then Thorgrim spoke andsaid, ‘I cannot bind on hellshoon at all if these loosen.’” Herethe duty seems not to have been that of the next of kin, butof the priest, one of whom Thorgrim was.</p>
			<p>such functions had attended it.* It was therefore considered a right and proper thing to ride to the Althing ; if for no other reason than that of seeing the world. Besides law matters, much else was done there in theway of business between man and man. Pleasure was not excluded. There were feasts and biddings to feasts, and, as we know in Hrut's and Gunnar's cases, marriagesmight be made there, for a man went thither often with his wife and daughters. If we may judge from severalpassages in our Saga, it was usual with the great chiefs</p>
			<p>THINGFIELD. Scale of English Miles</p>
			<p>B l á s k ö g (Blue Wood)</p>
			<p>Road from Reykjavik Almannagia (The Great Rift) Booth Mouth of Oxara Thingvalla Church Inundated Grass Valley Where the Horse Pasture Covered with stunted birch-bushes and gradually ascending towards Skialldbreid Jokull U p p e r P l a i n Hrafnagia (The Ravens Rift) Hrafnagia (Ravine) Thingvalla Almannagia Hrafnagia Bartholomew sc. Edin EDMONSTON &amp; DOUGLAS, EDINBURGH.</p>
			<p>to send on kinsmen or retainers to fit up their booths, which stood all along Axewater,* from the waterfall to the lake. The Thingvalla or Thingfield itself, was a vast sheetof lava which at some unknown, but very early period, burst forth from the fells in the direction of Armann’sfell, and taking a south-easterly direction flowed on till itmet the Thingvalla Lake. When first formed it lay witha dip from north-east to south-west, that being the naturalinclination of the soil which it covered. It must havebeen a mighty stream, for an arm, or rather the body ofit, poured down the country on the western shore of the Thingvalla Lake for many miles. At some later period, all that portion of this stream with which we have moreparticularly to do, and which lay at the north end of</p>
			<p>the lake, dropped at once and subsided. The lava outof which it was formed was cavernous, an immensebubble inflated by gaseous vapours at the time of theeruption, which subsequently sank and collapsed eitherfrom its own weight or by the force of subterraneanfire. When it subsided it still kept its old dip fromnorth-east to south-west, so that the eastern side of the Thingvalla, “the upper plain,” as it is called in our Saga, remained considerably higher than that on thewest. The line of subsidence on either side was markedby two long chasms, or rifts, or furrows in the lava, theouter and higher edge or brink of each being at theoriginal level of the whole stream as it first poured from the fell, while the inner and lower edge was formed asthe lava bent and curled up, as it were, when it dropped. At the same time the whole surface of the brittlesunken field was split and cracked with countless lesserrifts, which were most numerous and most marked on itssouth-western slope. The rift or furrow on the easternside was called the Raven’s Rift or Geo (Hrafnagjá), thaton the west, which was much more deeply furrowed andindented than the other, was called the Great Rift or Geo (Almannagjá). Of this last rift, both the lips or edges increase in height as they near the lake. The dip and subsidence having been evidently greatest at the south-western</p>
			<p>TOPOGRAPHY OF THE THINGFIELD. cxxvii</p>
			<p>angle of the field. About a mile and a half from wherethe Great Rift touches the Lake, its inner lip ceases, andjust above this point a stream, Öxará (Axewater), leapsin a waterfall down from the outer lip of the Rift whichstill continues, runs for a short space parallel to it, thenflows out into the Thingfield, and finds its way southto the Lake, cutting off a strip of the field between itselfand the inner lip of the Rift. If it be asked why thestream does not follow the furrow of the Rift to the Lake, the answer is that as the bed of the furrow risesfrom the Lake, and as the lips lessen in height as theyrecede from it, the furrow, just south of the point atwhich the river falls down from its outer lip, is at a higherlevel than the bed of the stream, and much higher thanthat of the general level of the Thingfield, which isreached from the Rift by a sharp descent. The river therefore flows down towards the field in a rapid. Just wherethe stream turns into the plain below the point wherethe inner lip of the Rift ceases, it forms an island, ortwo or three islands, as the water happens to be high orlow, mere shoals of lava sand which rise out of itsshallow bed. A short quarter of a mile from the bed of Axewater, and to the south-east of the island at theturn, a rocky portion of the plain has been cut off by the junction of two of the lesser rifts or fissures which</p>
			<p>have been mentioned, so as almost to form an island. This is the famous Hill of Laws, or Lögberg, of whichwe hear so much in our Story, and which was the heartof the Icelandic body politic. Here, on the highestpeak of the rock, on the Lögberg properly so called, formal notices of trials, and proclamations on matters ofpublic interest, were uttered by word of mouth, andhere too, on the more level portion of it was the Courtof Laws (Lögretta), the Supreme Court, and Deliberative Assembly or Parliament of the Commonwealth. Theentrance to it was by a neck of land so narrow thatthree bold men might hold it against a host. Therifts that encircle it as with a moat are broad and deep. They are about sixteen feet wide in their narrowestpoint, across which Flosi, the leader of the Burners, is said by a tradition, which, though unconfirmed byour Saga, seems sufficiently trustworthy to mention, to have made a wild leap when the great battle aroseat the Althing, after the suit for the Burning had beenheard. The depth of the rifts all round are about nineteen fathoms, fifteen of which are filled with water, and the other four are sheer and ragged rock. Such were, and such are, the features of the Thingfield, a vastsunken plain of lava, about four miles broad, and rathermore than four miles deep, lying with a dip or slope from</p>
			<p>TOPOGRAPHY OF THE THINGFIELD. cxxix</p>
			<p>north-east to south-west, between two great rifts, or furrows, to the inner lips of which, east and west, theground rises with a steep ascent. The Great Rift, on thewest, is only accessible from the Thingfield by one steeppath, leading to a single point just south of and abovethe bed of the river. On this western side, Axewater (Öxará), a stream of no great breadth or depth cuts offa narrow strip of the Thingfield, beyond which the innerlip of the Great Rift abruptly rises, increasing rapidlyin height and steepness as it nears the lake. It was along the banks of this stream that the booths of thefreemen and others who flocked to the Althing from thefour Quarters of the land chiefly lay. Some way downthe stream there was a bridge, in all likelihood not ofstone, but such as that which still spans Brúará, Bridgewater, made of planks and baulks of timber, of whichmaterial, indeed, we know from Grágás,* that the bridgesin Iceland were commonly made.†</p>
			<p>With regard to the position of the various booths, itseems certain that the chiefs and Thingmen from thesame Quarter all established themselves on the samepart of the Thingfield. So far as we can learn, the Eastfirthers, and the dwellers in the district more immediately round the Althing itself, were almost the onlychiefs that had their booths east of Axewater. Thus Njal, and the men of Rangriver, are said to have pitchedtheir booths on the west bank, close to the lake. Nextto them were the Daledwellers (Dalverjar), that is, themen of the Dale priesthood, east of Markfleet ; then</p>
			<p>of the bridge while his father gathers force to part the two bands. When he comes back they cross the bridge, but by this time Flosiand his band had been driven down the west bank of the streamsome way, and Ljot is slain as soon as ever he reaches the lava ; that is, as soon as ever he crossed the turf that borders the bed of thestream and began to ascend the slope to the inner lip of the Great Rift. This is also shown from Hrafnkell Freysgoða Saga, p. 12, where Samand old Thorbjorn, who, though Eastfirthers, had not pitched theirbooth together with those of the other Eastfirthers high up thestream near the waterfall, get up early one morning and go down to Axewater to wash themselves below the bridge (fyrir neðan brúna). Opposite to them, on the west of the stream, were the booths of themen from Thorskafirth, in the north-west. As it is expressly said thatboth Sam and Thorbjorn wished to pitch their booths &quot;nowherenear those of the Eastfirthers,&quot; and as we know that the Eastfirtherswere high up the stream, and that Sam to avoid them went to thebridge, we may infer that the bridge was well down the stream, evenwithout the confirmation of this view afforded by our Saga.</p>
			<p>Öxará (River)</p>
			<p>Waterfall Byrgire Booth Lögberg (Law Rock) Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth Booth</p>
			<p>TOPOGRAPHY OF THE THINGFIELD. cxxxi</p>
			<p>came the men of Mossfell and the Lithe ; next the menfrom Borgarfirth ; then the men from the West Firths— from Thorskafirth, opposite to the bridge, and Waterfirth. Then came the chiefs from the north, from Skagafirthand Eyjafirth ; and then above them the chiefs from Hvammsfirth and the eastern shore of Broadfirth. Inthe Hladbooth, which seems to have stood close to theriver bank, nearest to the turn at the island, Eyjolf Bolverk’s son, Snorri’s kinsman, had his booth ; and abovehim, on the top of the steep rise leading to the Rift, justwhere the inner lip dies away, and so makes it possibleto get into the furrow, was the Outwork-booth, Virkisbooth, in which Snorri the priest had established himself at the Althing held after Njal’s burning ; here it was, on the rise, that he drew up his men, and hindered Flosiand the Burners from making their way into the Rift.</p>
			<p>By this booth, which, no doubt, took its name from the strength of the position,* led the only path up to the Great Rift from the Thingfield ; the ascent, as we havesaid, and as may be seen still better from our plans, issteep and rugged, rising sharply from the river. It wasthis path that Flosi, Bjarni, and Hallbjorn took with Eyjolf, whom they had just met at the Hladbooth down</p>
			<p>below, when they led him up into the Great Rift beforegiving him the ring as a bribe to undertake their defence. When they came to the point at the top of therise where the inner and lower lip of the Rift ends, theyordered their men to sit down there and keep watch, while they went on into the Rift till they reached thespot where the road then turned, as it still turns, up theside of the outer and upper lip of the Rift, and there it was, after they had scaled a portion of its height, that theymade Eyjolf sit down between them, and first flattered, and then fairly bribed him with a massive gold ring, totake upon him the conduct of the cause which Bjarnihad foreseen would end in the death of the man whopleaded it.</p>
			<p>Returning to the Thingfield, and descending the steeppath which leads to the Thingfield, the way leads acrossthe island, called in later times Execution Island, butwhich, in the days of which we write, was better knownas the holm on which duels* were fought. It was to</p>
			<p>POSITION OF THE BOOTHS. cxxxiii</p>
			<p>this island that Hrut challenged Mord, when the goodlawyer, at the advice of his old friend Jorund the priest, refused to go. The scoffing which followed that refusalshows that public opinion had expected him to fallback on the customs of his forefathers, and put histrust in the God of Battles. It was to the same islandthat Hrut, in his turn, was challenged by Gunnar, andwas told by his friends to follow Mord’s example, and torefuse, because he was no more a match for Gunnar than Mord had been for him. Crossing the river and standing on its eastern bank, we are about on the spot where the old Quarter Courts sat. It is plain, even from the term “going out” used of the judges, that those Courts did not sit on the Lögberg, but our Saga gives us a better proof of the fact, in the account of the suit after the Burning, when itsays that Mord called upon his inquest to take theirseats “west on the river bank,” and when it tells us, shortly afterwards, that while Mord and Asgrim weresummoning Flosi and Eyjolf to the Fifth Court, whichwe know sat on the Lögberg, on the site of the Court of Laws, Flosi and Eyjolf were losing their time at the Eastfirthers’ Quarter Court, in trying to divide (vèfengja) the judges, and thus nonsuit the plaintiff. On the western bank of the stream, in a line with</p>
			<p>the waterfall, was Byrgir’s booth, the farthest north, as Njal’s is said to have been the farthest south, of all thebooths. South of this booth, but on the eastern side of the water, were the booths of the men from Axefirthand Weaponfirth, and from all the Eastfirths in succession. As far as we can judge from the imperfect accounts which have come down to us, a portion of the Northlanders, such as the men from Lightwater, seem tohave had their booths on this side the stream, alongwith the Eastfirthers, whom they backed in theirquarrel, while another portion of them, headed by Gudmund the powerful, had their booths on the westof the stream, close to Snorri and the Westfirthers. It is possible that we may see in this split among themen of the north the results of that great feud between Gudmund and the men of Lightwater, in which thatmighty chief for once was worsted, and had to bear theill words spread abroad about him, to which Skarphedinn referred in his sharp reproof to Gudmund. Somewhere west of the river, and according to some, but verylate accounts, in the midst of the Thingfield, betweenthe two rifts, Skapti Thorod’s sons’ booth stood withone or two others ; and in later times, when there werebishops in Iceland, the bishop’s booth, the site of whichis still pointed out, stood below the bridge, just above</p>
			<h3>POSITION OF THE BOOTHS. CXXXV</h3>
			<p>the freeman’s churchyard. This burial-place, which wouldnot have been used for such a purpose in heathen times, when the custom seems to have been to bury a manclose to where he died or fell, and throw a heap of stonesor cairn over him of greater or less size, was probably, until the Change of Faith, a portion of the site, if notthe site itself, of the local Thing, over which the Priestof the whole Host (Allsherjargoði) presided. The position of the Christian church close by, and the fact thatit was the place where the fines awarded at the Althingseem to have been collected, would speak for this, evenif we did not know that it was usual with the Christiansto seize the sacred places and sanctuaries which theheathen used to frequent, and to baptise and hallowthem to Christian purposes. However this may be, thesite of the churchyard is well known, and, as such, wehave marked it on our plan running down quite to theriver bank.*</p>
			<p>In modern times almost every traveller who visitsthe Thingfield approaches it from Reykjavik, and after Snorri's booth, but the level space (hleðsla) which is there betweenthem on the brink of the Rift, was in old time (áðr) the place of meeting for the Quarter Courts (fjórðungsdóma) ; but on the rise on thesouth of Snorri's booth, as one makes for the Thingfield, wasthe booth of Eyjolf Bolverk's son ; but where the Governor's boothnow is, was in old time Gizur the white's booth, but that next on the north of it, now called Hedemann's booth, was of old Geirthe priest's booth. Asgrim Ellidagrim's son's booth was up towardsthe rift, opposite to (mots við) the governor's booth. Egil Skallagrim's son's booth was between the booth of Geir the priest and the Rift, straight up. Hauskuld Dale-Kolli's son's booth was betweenthe river and Geir the priest's booth. The booth of Hjallti Skeggi'sson was north of the Court of Laws. Flosi had at first his bootheast of the river, and a short way from Hall of the Side's booth, whichwas afterwards Ögmund's booth, west of the fences of the Thingvalla ' town.' The booth of Gudmund the powerful was near the riveron the west side, by the way which comes down from Snorri's boothto the Court of Laws ; his booth before was to the north? of theriver, near to the old Hill of Laws, which was east of the river. Between the Rifts was also a bye-path, which led to the booth of Skapti the Lawman (Speaker of the Law), the son of Thorod, andalso to the booths of Marcus Skeggi's son and Grim Sverting's son. Farthest of all south, along the river, opposite to Thingvallastede, was Njal's booth, near the river, to the south of Gizur the white'sbooth, and the booths of the men of Rangrivervale. Fiddle Mord'sbooth was out towards the hill above, and west of Gizur the white'sbooth. In the time of Thord and John the lawmen, the Court of Laws was brought from the south off the holm, and east of the oldgovernor's booth, to the Court of Laws which now is (1700), andwhich was built of timber.&quot; Thord Gudmund's son, and John John's</p>
			<p>THE THINGFIELD IN 1000 AND 1700. cxxxvii</p>
			<p>riding for hours over barren and rugged tracts of mossgrown lava, suddenly reins up his galloway on theson, were, the one lawman for the south and east Quarters, the otherlawman for the north and west, between the years 1570-1605. Seethe list of Speakers of the Law, Safn til Sögu Ísl., II. 10. Withregard to this description of the arrangement of the booths, it must besaid that it rests entirely on late tradition, and is generally perplexingby comparing things of which we do know something with thingsof which we know nothing—things like Snorri's booth in 1000 with the Governor's booth in 1700. In some points the tradition of 1700 is directly at variance with our Saga. It is perhaps possible, thoughit is not very likely, that Byrgir's booth, where Flosi established himself, might have been west of the river under the waterfall, but wecannot see why at such a time he should have left the booths of hismen from the east and his friends from the north and gone nearerto his foes. In this point, therefore, we think that if the traditionof 1700 refers to Byrgir's booth as west of the river, it is wrong. Whether Flosi, who lived many years after the Burning, went awaywith his booth west at some later period of his life, is anotherquestion. But most plainly wrong is the tradition of 1700 when itsays that Thorgeir of Lightwater's booth was where the Court of Laws stood in 1700, that is, as it says farther on, west of the river, for our Saga most positively says that the booths of the men of Lightwater were east of the river. Again, when it says that Skapti Thorod's son's booth was east of the river, between the Rifts, this is also contradicted by our Saga, for it is plain in all theaccounts of begging for help at the Althing that Skapti's booth wason the west side of the river, not far from the booths of the menfrom Mossfell, and from those of Möðruvale. In the battle at the Althing he probably left his booth and came up the west bank of theriver, and so met the battle coming down as he was making for Snorri's booth. The tradition of 1700 may perhaps be right when</p>
			<p>very brink of the upper lip of the Great Rift, and gazesupon the sunk field, stretching miles before him. By</p>
			<p>it says that Gudmund the powerful changed his booth from east towest, for, as we have seen in the text, he might have been led to doso after being worsted by the men of Lightwater. In this our Saga agrees with the tradition of 1700, for on several occasions, in the beggings for help, it implies that Gudmund’s booth was on thewest bank; and in the account of the battle at the Althing, it says, in as many words, that the men of Möðruvale, of whom Gudmundwas the mighty chief, were on that side of the stream. Whetherthe tradition is right in putting the Quarter Courts on the west sideof the stream is great matter of doubt. It is true that, in the suitfor the Burning, Mord calls on his inquest to take their seats “weston the river bank;” but the “west” seems here to mean west of the Court, which we believe sate on the east side of the stream. Had the Court sat west of the river, Mord would have used thewords “east on the river bank,” to imply that the inquest sat eastof the Court. The tradition is probably right when it places Njal’sbooth furthest south of all; and when it places the men of Rangriver, Mossfell, and the Lithe on that side. We know from othersources, besides the tradition, that the men of the West Firths hadtheir booths on the west bank; and our Saga agrees with the tradition, when it places Eyjolf Bolverk’s son’s booth, which it calls the Hladbooth, a name which perhaps means “Brinkbooth,” below thatof Snorri, on the river’s brink. We know from Sturlúnga, II., p. 82, that this Hladbooth, whatever the name may mean, belonged to Snorri’s family, of whom Eyjolf was one, for he was Snorri’s cousin. The words of Sturlúnga are—“That summer Thord came early to the Thing and fitted up the Hladbooth, which went with, or belongedto, the priesthood or family of Snorri (Hlaðbúð er fylgði Snorrúngagoðorði). It seems to have come to the Sturlúngs by the marriage</p>
			<p>ROADS TO THE ALTHING. cxxxix</p>
			<p>that route the Westfirthers and Borgarfirthers, and someof the Northlanders from Skagafirth and Húnafirthsought the Althing in ancient times ; but so far as our Saga is concerned, that route is only once or twice particularly mentioned; while on the other hand, as thechief actors in the Saga came from a district lying southeast of the Thingfield, almost all the wayfarers thitherare described as reaching it by the eastern, or Raven’s Rift lying opposite to the Great or Western Rift. Mostof the Northlanders, all the Eastfirthers, as well as themen from the Dale east of Markfleet, the men from the Lithe, from Mossfell, and from the Rangriver vales, tookpaths which converged sooner or later till they all metin Laugardale, the site of the Geysers, and thence wenton by one road to the Althing. The Eastfirthers goingto the Althing after the Burning had to ride rightthrough their enemy’s country, and we know that theyrode in force enough to turn slightly aside at Tongue, and to humble Asgrim’s pride. After this topographical description we may turn from the place itself to the main cause which drew this great</p>
			<p>of Gils with Thordisa, the heiress of Guðlaugr, the last of the Straumfirthers, whose mother was Thorkatla, the granddaughter and heiressof Snorri the priest. See the Genealogy of the Sturlúngs in the Tables at the end of Landnáma, Kph. 1843.</p>
			<p>gathering together year by year. The great business of the Althing, no doubt, was law. For law purposes it wasestablished, and for law it was maintained. It is therefore time that we should enter a little into Icelandiclaw, or at least into so much of that vast body of jurisprudence which serves to illustrate our Saga. Ourreaders will bear in mind that the legal constitution of Iceland, at the time of which we write, consisted of a Court of Laws or High Court (Lögretta), which was the Deliberative Assembly. There it was that all changes in the existing law were brought forward and passed, butthat the judicial power, the Courts of Law proper, werethe four Quarter Courts Fjórðungsdómr, each consistingof thirty-six judges named by the priests, in the waybefore described, and that the judges were bound to beunanimous, or else no judgment could be passed. Let us now turn our attention to a trial before the Quarter Court. Every freeman in Iceland who felt himself aggrieved or injured in any of his rights, had threeways open to him to obtain redress. He might betakehimself at once to the man who had done him wrong, either in word or deed, either by his own mouth orhand, or by those of others incited by him, and afterlaying the grievance before him, demand a fine compensation and atonement in the way of money (bót). In</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. cxli</p>
			<p>this case the matter almost took the shape of a friendlyarrangement, and the difference was soon arranged. Suchwere the dealings of Njal and Gunnar when the wives oneither side were goading on their servants and kinsmento manslaughter after manslaughter. Of this kind, too, was the compensation which Gunnar offered to Otkell for Hallgerda’s stealing, Hauskuld’s atonement to Thorarinfor the death of Glum, Njal’s sons’ claim against Thrainfor the wrongs which they had suffered for his sake in Norway, Njal’s fine for the killing of Thrain, and manyother like instances in our Saga. In such cases theinjured side was looked upon as completely reconciled, and, indeed, the intimation that the friendship of theinjuring would follow for the time to come the injuredparty, was often held out to induce the latter to showhimself easy in his terms of atonement. Those termswere usually drawn up by some man of acknowledgedworth and honesty, indifferent to either side, and thenformally accepted by both. But it sometimes happenedthat one or other side claimed what was called selfdoom (sjalfdæmi), that is the right to make his own award. This was one of the choices which Gunnar offered to Otkell, and which he was silly enough to refuse; andit was what Gunnar got at last as his right, after thesuit was set on foot. It was so great an honour, that</p>
			<p>Njal advised him not to reject it, pointing out that thegreater the matter at stake the greater was the honourin taking it. But if the wrong-doer refused to make any compensation, there were still two ways left of dealing withhim. 1st, The injured party might fall back on hisright of private war, and take vengeance on him byfollowing up the feud, and by killing him or some nearmember of his family. Indeed this way lay opento him from the very first ; but in no state of society, however swift to shed blood, does war prevail overpeace, or society itself could not continue to exist, and we have therefore put the friendly arrangementfirst. Or 2d, he might follow it up at law, and somake the private wrong a matter for the consideration of the State. Here in fact we see the old freemanwaiving both his old natural rights—the right of property and the right of revenge—and appealing to thenew organization of things which he had accepted on the establishment of a commonwealth. When Gizurthe white and Geir the priest agree that the quarrelagainst Gunnar for Otkell's slaying shall be followed upat law, they were waiving those natural rights ; andfurther on in the same quarrel, when Geir asks Gunnar ifhe is going to challenge him to the island, “and not bear</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. cxliii</p>
			<p>the law,” he alludes to the same feeling.* With regardto the steps in such a trial, our Saga gives us everyinformation. The Icelandic lawsuit was based on theevidence of the community, supported by oath. Atevery step solemn witness was taken, and to fail inproducing such witness was to lose the suit. Manytrials for manslaughter are recorded in Njal, but theone reported at fullest length is in the famous case of the suit set on foot after Njal’s Burning. There wesee how Mord rode to the spot where the deed wasdone and summoned nine neighbours who lived nearestto the spot† to serve on an inquest at the Althing. These neighbours at the trial formed what was calledthe Kvið or inquest, and upon their finding the guiltof the defendant depended. Those nearest to the spotwere summoned, like our old English jurors de vicineto, because they were supposed to be cognizant of allthe facts, and to have seen the deed done, or at</p>
			<p>least to have been the first to hear that it had beendone. At the trial they heard no fresh evidence as to the fact. In fact, they brought the evidence with them, and were jurors and witnesses in one. In the presenceof these men who, in cases when the suit was swiftlyset on foot, saw the bodies of the slain, which wereexhumed for the purpose, the plaintiff in the suittook solemn witness that he gave lawful notice of anassault against such and such a man, who fell on suchand such a man and gave him a death wound. Sotechnical was the Law in this respect, that it required theplaintiff to repeat this notice in almost the same words, putting the wounds first and the assault last, in orderthat it might be seen that the plaintiff was proceedingwith all the solemnity and exactness which the law required. Next, the plaintiff again took witness, that hesummoned those nine neighbours to ride to the Althingto sit on the inquest, to find whether the manslaughterhad been committed in the way which he had said, and by the person whom he had named; and here again, the Lawrequired that this summons should be repeated, the plaintiff again putting the wounds first and the assault last. This was the first step in the trial, which was nowsaid to be “tilbúit,” set on foot, or hanging over the headsof the accused. It took its rise, as it will be seen, from</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. cxlv</p>
			<p>the very bosom of the community, and originated entirely with the next of kin, or nearest representatives of the slain, and with his nearest neighbours, as serving on the inquest, and bearing evidence as witnesses. Therewas no State interference of any kind.* When the time came for the meeting of the Althing, on the Thursday when ten summer weeks were passed,† all the parties to the suit, as well as all the witnesses, and the nine neighbours who were to form the inquest, were bound to ride to the Althing. There the nextstep in the suit was the solemn notice (lýsning) givenfrom the Hill of Laws of the suit, and at the same timethe plaintiff asked formally in what Quarter Court thesuit lay, and in what district and in what house in the Quarter the defendant dwelt,‡ in order that the suitmight be brought before the proper tribunal. Thisnotice might be given on any day, so that it was fairly</p>
			<p>early in the Thing, that the defendant might have duenotice. After that, the matter rested till the next Friday, when the Althing was nine days old. On that daythe judges went out to try causes.* Now, before the court solemnly set, and girt roundwith hallowed cords (vèbönd) running from stake tostake, the real pleading of the suit began. At the sametime, as we see from our Saga, a crowd of men stoodround without the verge of the sacred ring, and expressedby a deep hum of praise, and sometimes even by loudshouts of applause, their sympathy with one side or theother, and their sense of the skill displayed in the conduct of the cause. No judge nor usher then interferedto stifle those outbursts of popular feeling, which werepart of the Northman’s free and open nature. Havingsettled by lot his right to begin with others who hadlike suits, the plaintiff took witness, and bade the defendant to listen to his oath. Then he took his oath, and called on the defendant to listen to the proceedings, and first to his oath, that he would plead the suit in themost fair and lawful way. Then he called his witnessesto the fact, that he had on the spot given notice of a suitfor manslaughter against the defendant. Next those</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. cxlvii</p>
			<p>witnesses came forward, and bore witness that the plaintiff had taken them to witness of the notice given on thespot, in both cases the plaintiff and witnesses repeatingthe form of words, that they might be caught trippingif their evidence did not agree. The plaintiff then tookwitness, and bade the nine neighbours who were to formthe inquest, to take their seats west on the river bank, and called on the defendant to challenge the inquest (rýðja kviðin), if he had any lawful cause. With this step the opening of the plaintiff’s case orpleading ceased, and after taking witness that all thelawful steps and proofs had been brought in in dueform, he left it to the defendant to challenge the inquest. It was now the defendant’s turn to try to findsome flaw in the plaintiff’s case thus reduced to legalform. He began by taking technical objections to theconstitution of the inquest. In Njal’s case the firstobjection raised was to two of the inquest on the scoreof relationship to the plaintiff. One, it seems, was hissecond cousin, and so likely to be partial. The otherwas his relation by baptism, which was reckoned a stillmore binding tie than cousinship. This demurrer wouldhave been fatal to the suit had it not been met by thereply, which was ruled to be good at law, that thesechallenges must be made for kinship to the true plain-</p>
			<p>tiff, the real next of kin, and not, as in the case before the Court, to one who was conducting the suit on his part. The defendant might also challenge any of the inquestfor not being really householders, and did so in Njal’scase, but this challenge was overruled, on the groundthat lodgers and tenants might still sit on an inquest ifthey possessed a certain amount of property. The defendant might also challenge the inquest because theywere not all of them actually the nearest neighbours to the spot where the deed was done, and the law was veryjealous on this point. In Njal’s case four had been thuswrongfully summoned, and the suit seemed to havebroken down, when the dexterity of the plaintiff’s adviserdevised a lawful remedy, though the device showed anamount of legal knowledge which it was thought thatfew or none possessed, and which was only declared to belaw by the opinion of the Speaker of the Law asked andgiven. According to his ruling, it was good law thatfive out of the nine men on the inquest could still uttertheir finding, though four had been challenged and setaside. The plaintiff was subject to a heavy fine for everyman that he had summoned wrongfully, but that hadnothing to do with the case before the Court. A baremajority of the nine might make a quorum, and the suit was still alive.</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. cxlix</p>
			<p>When the legal cunning of the defendant had exhausted all such challenges, and failed to find a flaw in the plaintiff's case, the plaintiff went on, and called on the inquest to utter their finding. This they proceededto do, stating that they had been summoned by theplaintiff &quot;to bear witness,&quot; and utter a finding whethersuch and such a man, naming the defendant, had assaulted, wounded, and slain such and such other man, naminghim also by name. They had found their finding, andnow uttered it for or against the said defendant, as thecase might be. If for, the suit fell to the ground andcame to naught; if against, they were bound to repeat their finding, uttering it first as to the wounds and lastas to the assault, that the law might catch them trippingif it could. The plaintiff then went before the Court, andtook witness that the inquest had uttered their findingagainst the defendant. He then summed up all thesteps taken in the suit, and called on the other side tobeg in their defence, their efforts up to that time havingbeen confined to finding flaws in the plaintiff's pleading, or in the summoning and constitution of the inquest. The defendant then began his defence in due form, whichwas conducted with the same amount of witness-bearing and oath-taking, and the same legal repetitions asmarked the plaintiff's case. If he could succeed in</p>
			<p>setting up a defence on the merits of the case, or atechnical one on the jurisdiction or constitution of thecourt, he stopped the progress of the suit, and it fell to the ground. On technical grounds, the defendant in Njal’s case forbade the judges to hear the suit by a protest made before a priest, “according to the commoncustom of the Althing and the law of the land.” Theprotest was followed by a demand that the court shouldpass judgment for the defence. If he failed in securingthe proper majority to override dissentients, he tried tosplit or divide the court (at vèfengja dóminn), and inthat case also the case of the plaintiff who had failed tosecure a majority on his side would lose his suit. If, on the other hand, the defence failed, or none wasset up in answer to the bidding of the plaintiff, one of the judges, whom we have called the foreman for wantof a better name, and over whose head, or standingbefore whom, the plaintiff had pleaded his case, thewitnesses borne their evidence, and the inquest utteredtheir finding, arose and summed up the whole proceedings, step by step.* After the summing up was over, theplaintiff took witness that he forbade the defendant toset up his defence, now that the case had been summed</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. cli</p>
			<p>up, and the foreman added this last step to his summingup. The plaintiff then took witness again, and prayedthe court to pass judgment, in which six at least, andno more than thirty-six judges must agree. The old Icelandic judges, in some of their functions, were like our jurymen, and like them, too, were boundto be unanimous. With an amount of common sense, however, which might well be imitated in some English jury cases, it was provided that if the minoritywho disagreed with the judgment of the majority wereonly one or two, they were bound, under a penalty ofcontempt of court, to side with the majority, but allowedto give reasons why they would have passed anothersentence, if they could have had their way. In this waythe maxim of another system of Jurisprudence, “de minimis non curat lex,” was enforced in Iceland, the minoritysaved their conscience by a protest, and justice, according to the opinion of the majority, was done. Noobstinate enduring juryman on the wrong side could, under that system, have forced eleven weak and fastingwretches to side with him in spite of right and justice. plaintiff and another for the defendant. When judgment was at lastgiven, if it were for the plaintiff, his foreman uttered the judgment in the name of the whole court, and the rest assented; if it were for the defendant, his foreman, who had summed up his defence, utteredthe judgment of the court in his favour.</p>
			<p>But if, on the other hand, there was what we shouldcall a respectable minority, if six out of the thirty-six, thatbeing the number requisite to form a quorum of the judges, or if more than six were on one side and six or more againstthem, this was such a marked difference of opinion on the Bench as to form what was called vèfang,* and the judgeswere said (at ganga til vèfangs) to go to a division. Theyparted into two bodies, and could pass no judgment, because all lawful judgments must be unanimous. Theplaintiff, therefore, was non-suited, not from any fault of his own, because the court was divided in opinion. If thisoccurred in an under court at the Spring Thing or the Quarter Thing, the matter might be brought afresh beforethe Quarter Courts at the Althing, and then and therejustice might be done ; but what if it occurred at the Quarter Court itself? In that case the law was bankrupt, as Maurer says, and men had to look to their oldremedy, the sword, if they wished to be righted. Alongwith the new system of law which had sprung up since</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. cliii</p>
			<p>Ulfjot’s days, there was, no doubt, much that shockedthe free spirit of the people, who saw themselves shackledand trammelled by legal principles which they couldnot understand, but which, when applied, they felt werevery grievous. It was no doubt a hardship for menwhose forefathers were wont to settle such matters bystrength of arm, trusting in Odin’s help, to find that the help and cunning of man availed them so little thatafter pursuing suits from one court to another, andhoping vainly for justice, they were to be told the lawcould not help them, and that they had no legal remedy, because the judges could not agree. Besides this evil, which was inherent in the law itself, came the abusesof the law—the bribery, chicanery, and false swearing, which will ever follow in the train of law, so long as theheart of man is what it is. In fact, the law in Iceland, after having been in force about seventy years, no longersatisfied the people so far as trials were concerned, and the system which had been introduced to tame and regulatethe old system of trial by wager of battle had broken down.*</p>
			<p>In our sketch of a trial before the Quarter Court, at the Althing, we have purposely omitted one very important feature of these proceedings, only that we might</p>
			<p>return to it, and impress it more forcibly on the reader'sattention. This was the fact that both plaintiff anddefendant might hand over the pleading or the defenceto any other person whom they chose.* This was donein Njal's case, and in many other cases in our Saga, and the reason of it will be plain to every one who hastaken the pains to follow the steps of the suit. It wasno easy thing to plead the simplest suit in Icelandic Law, it required a good head and sound memory, andgreat skill in all the technicalities of the law, not merelyto meet the questions and quibbles of the defence, buteven to state one's own case step by step, taking oathafter oath, and calling witness after witness, withoutmaking a false step. A man might have the bestcase in the world or the best defence, and yet failfor want of power to plead it, or to defend it. On suchoccasions, the services of what we should now call acounsel learned in the law, were absolutely necessary, and in our Saga we see that Flosi and the Burners</p>
			<p>been an undoubted right that any man who could gather togethersufficient strength might force his way to where the Court wassitting, and there break it up, and so stop its sentence. Compare Hrafnkell's case, further on.</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. clv</p>
			<p>having no such man among their friends and kinsmenwere forced to obtain by a heavy fee the help of a greatlawyer from the other end of Iceland. In short, themaxim of English lawyers, that he who pleads his owncause has a fool for his client, was as well understood on the banks of Axewater as on those of the Thames, andthus the whole community were handed over to thepower of these law-skilled men, of these counsel learned in the law, who employed, as we have seen, every quirkand quibble in pleading or defending the cause of theirclients. It is no wonder then, that with the old rightof wager of battle still existing in the back ground, weshould find such men as Hrut challenging Mord, whenlegal chicanery is employed against him, or Gunnar Hrut when he is met by a legal quibble as to a flaw insummoning a witness. As society grew, and the Icelandic Commonwealth shot up, law grew and flourishedwith it, with its full crop of technicalities and specialpleading; and as we have seen it would be easy fora man with the simplest case to be tripped up by the cunning of an adversary who was either a goodlawyer himself, or had persuaded some law-skilledman like Mord Valgard's son to take up his suit. When to this is added the fact that even if a defendant failed in setting up a legal defence, he might</p>
			<p>so perplex the minds of the judges as to divide thecourt in opinion, and render any judgment impossible, since a time-honoured principle of Northern Lawrequired that all the judges should be unanimous ; andthat thus a plaintiff’s suit, after all the pains he had takento bring his witnesses and inquest to the spot, and tosecure its safe conduct by handing it over to a goodlawyer to plead, might still come to naught, becausethere was no higher court to which it could be carried.— When all this could happen, it was no wonder, we sayagain, that men should be disinclined to try their suitsat law at all, but rather resolve to fall back to the oldduel and seek their rights, as they told Njal, “by pointand edge,” or, as we should say in plain English, “bycut and thrust.” It was this public need we may be sure, and notthat idle story told by the Saga-teller about Hauskuld Thrain’s son’s marriage, that induced Njal, the greatlawyer, and the man of unstained honour and worth, tocome forward with a remedy for an evil which he musthave looked upon with alarm as a great stride backwardstowards the old domain of barbarism. Law might haveits evils, but it was at any rate better than lawlessness, which wastes a land and robs her of her best and bravestsons. “Let wise heads, therefore,” said Njal, “meeting in</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. clvii</p>
			<p>the Court of Laws&quot;—in which, though no priest, heclearly had a seat—&quot;devise a remedy for this great evil.&quot; When called on to state his views, he brought forwardhis famous project for the establishment of a Fifth Court, into which suits arising out of those very evils ofwhich the freemen complained were to be tried. First of all, the new court was to hear all matters of Contempt of the Thing,* such as the bearing of false witnessor uttering a false finding ; all wilful deviations from thepath of public duty at the Althing, under which generalhead, any attempt to break up the Courts by force wouldbe included ; all bribery and corruption, either on the partof the briber and the bribed, for help in suits ; and thoughlast not least, all those suits in which the judges of the Quarter Courts were divided in opinion, and could arriveat no decision according to the old principles of the law. The proceedings of the new court were to be</p>
			<p>attended with the strongest and most binding oaths, and two vouchers were to follow every oath so taken by the parties, who were to back on their word of honour oron their oath the truth of what the others swore. Thenumber of the judges was increased, and four twelveswere to be named to sit as judges in the new court ; butas the old principle of three twelves was still regardedas a thing too holy to touch, twelve of these were to bechallenged and set aside, six by the plaintiff and six by the defendant, or the whole twelve by the plaintiff ifthe defendant, when called on, refused to exercise hisright. In this way the great grievance of the commonwealth was cured by the erection of a Court of Appeal, as well as by a most important rule of the new tribunal, which provided that the judges were no longer tovote unanimously, but were allowed to divide and todecide by a majority. At the same time by making thenew court the tribunal before which all cases of contempt of the Thing were to come, cases which weredefined to be just that very bribery, corruption, chicanery, and false swearing, of which the common man complained, the excuse for resorting to the old system ofpoint and edge was cut away, for no man could now saythat it was impossible to get his rights except by thesword ; and, as a matter of fact, we find duelling as a</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. clix</p>
			<p>legal remedy done away with by law almost immediatelyafter the institution of the Fifth Court, while the oldright of scattering the court by main force became oneof those cases of contempt of the Thing of which thenew tribunal was to take cognizance. But as the number of witnesses, judges and freemen fitted to serve on the inquest, was already almostenough to exhaust the resources of the old priesthoods, it was resolved to erect new priesthoods, in order tofind witnesses, judges, and inquests for the new court. One of these new priesthoods Hauskuld Njal's fosterchild was chosen to fill, and this fact, no doubt, ledto the story, told either by some one incapable of comprehending Njal's public spirit, or perhaps wilfully bysome enemy to the new scheme, that Njal had devisedthe whole scheme merely as a means to get a priesthood and a good match for his foster-child. We say an enemy, because the plan could not havebeen very grateful to the possessors of the old priesthoods, who now saw their monopoly invaded, and alarge portion of their power transferred to rivals whowould have the power of naming the judges in a courthigher than any of their own. It also attacked them in their local districts at home, the real seat of their power, by making a reality of what was only before a shadow,</p>
			<p>the right of every Thingman to leave his priest’s Thingif he chose. Here was not only the principle assertedafresh, but a way shown and a means provided of making it earnest. No wonder then that the old priests, whose power, it must be remembered, had not long beforereceived a terrible blow, aimed at its very heart, on the Change of Faith, were vexed at the innovation, andthat stubborn heathens like Valgard the guileful wereanxious to avenge the wrong which they had received on the author of the change, and on thosenearest and dearest to him. It is probable too that the discontent amongst suitors, of which our Sagaspeaks, was much more serious than it would appearfrom the way in which it is told, and that the priestswho filled the Court of Laws were terrified by popularclamour into yielding their assent so readily to Njal’sscheme; but even he could not carry out his wishes to the full. The most radical alteration which he proposedat the same time, was contained in his proposal, that in the Court of Laws those only should have the right ofvoting who sat on the middle bench, but that those onlyshould be chosen to sit on that bench who were wisestand best. This was the hardest blow ever aimed at theold system of influence exercised by the priests, andhad it been fully carried out, their power as legislators</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. clxi</p>
			<p>must have ceased to exist; but, by one of those dexterous turns which a governing body so well knows togive to a proposition for reform, part only of Njal'splan became law, while part was dropped. The rightof voting was restricted to those who sat on themiddle bench, but the “ best and wisest” were notchosen to sit on it; the priests kept their right ofsitting on that bench as before; and thus that halfof Njal's proposition which was carried into effectonly tended to strengthen still more the power of theruling aristocracy. But we have still something more to tell of an Icelandic trial. After judgment was given against thedefendant, he was termed “ sekr,” “ guilty” or “ convicted,” and the plaintiff then went on to make hisadversary an outlaw, if the offence was such as to calldown that punishment. This was done by formal noticeat the Hill of Laws, but the sentence was not complete— he was not alsekr, not an out and out outlaw, so long asthe Court of Execution, Fèránsdómr, had not been held. Such a court seems to have been held on all convicts, even in cases where the sentence only amounted tobanishment from a particular district of the island ; butin graver offences it depended on the result of thatcourt of inquisition whether the convict was to be a</p>
			<p>lesser outlaw, fjörbaugsmaðr, or a thorough outlaw, skógmaðr. If he had property enough to pay his debts, his wife’s dower—supposing him to be married—thefines to which he had been sentenced, and the priest’sfee, and bail,* if he could do all this, he had three placesof asylum granted to him for three years, till he could geta passage to foreign parts, to fulfil the three years’ exilewhich was the sentence of the Court in cases punishableby the lesser outlawry. No man could touch him on hisway to or from those places of refuge, or to or from theship; nor might any shipmaster refuse him a passage, under peril of falling into outlawry himself.† On hisreturn after three years’ absence he was a free man andrestored to all his rights, but if he could not get apassage before three years were spent, he fell intothorough outlawry, and his life was at any man’s mercywho could take it. So too, if at the Court of Execution he could not satisfy the claims above mentioned,</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. clxiii</p>
			<p>and especially, if he could not pay the priest’s fine, hebecame at once a thorough outlaw (skógmaðr), and wasforced to fly the haunts of men. This Court was to beheld at the outlaw’s own abode, within fourteen daysafter the last day of the Althing (eptir vápnatak), that is, after men took their arms, which they weresupposed not to use during the peace which was proclaimed while the Thing lasted, and rode away home. But it was no easy thing to hold such a court at agreat chief’s house who, when outlawed, either in hispresence or absence at the Althing, might gathersuch a band of followers around him as to set theplaintiff and the law at defiance. The law providedagainst this by giving the community an interest in halfof the goods forfeited by the outlaw, the plaintiff beingentitled to the other half, and the Priest of the districtwas bound to put the law in force by a formal process, in which all the technicalities of witnesses, oaths, andformularies, were again repeated. In cases where theoutlaw was the Priest of the district itself, the plaintiffmight obta in the help of some other Priest, and put thelaw in execution by main force. This was the case with the great chief of the east country, Hrafnkell Frey’s Priest, who having been taken unawares at the Althingby an adversary, who had brought a charge of man-</p>
			<p>slaughter against him, and outlawed before he could getto the court and scatter it with an armed band, rode offhome, and hoped to set the law at defiance. It was along ride to Hrafnkelstede in Jokulsdalewater in theeast, but the plaintiff and his band, eighty in number, had just reached the spot on the morning of the lastday left for execution. Having broken into the house, Hrafnkell being now again taken unawares, they seizedhim and his men in their beds, eight of them inall. Hrafnkell begged them to spare his men's life, and that he might not be treated with indignity, but theythrew a rope from the main building to an outhouse, cut holes through the waistbands of their hose, passedthe rope through the holes, and so strung them all up ina row, with their heads hanging down on one side of the rope and their heels on the other. Having treated Hrafnkell thus, whose crime was one which called downat once the highest sentence of the law, they proceededto hold the Court of Execution in due form. This wascalled at heyja féránsdóm. The court sat a bowshot offthe dwellings of men, on some stony hill where there wasneither cornfield nor mead (hvártki akr nè eng). It wasto be held at noon, when the sun was due south. Afterthis step had been taken, the outlawry was complete, andunless certain stipulations had been made concerning it,</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. clxv</p>
			<p>as that the outlaw should go abroad for ever, or for aterm of years, and keep his lands on his return, or unlessat the Court of Execution he had brought in his fine to the priest, and his bail, which allowed him an asylumin certain places while he stayed in the country, hebecame a thorough outlaw, and his life was at themercy of the plaintiff, or any other man of the community who could kill him. In the case of Hrafnkellthe plaintiff Sam, who was a man of easy nature, gave Hrafnkell his life, after taking him down from the rope, on condition that he should give up all his property, a little of which only was restored to him, and thenbanished him the district.* This was quite againstthe advice of his friend the priest of Thorskafirth, Thorkell of the lock, who knowing the characters ofboth the men, foresaw that Hrafnkell would thrivewherever he was, but that Sam, the plaintiff, could notcontend with him. His foresight was verified, forthough Sam took Hrafnkell’s priesthood from him, andhis Thingmen joined him, Hrafnkell lost no time insetting up another priesthood close by, where hebecame shortly thriving and prosperous, and at last tookample revenge on Sam.</p>
			<p>This execution and forfeiture, with the greater orlesser outlawry consequent on it, was the end of a trialfor manslaughter, carried to its full length, but we thinkthat these suits rarely went so far at the time of whichwe write. The tendency of the whole Icelandic legislation was not to put forth the full force of the law, but rather to make matters up. Even the banishmentfor three years was looked upon as a means of preventing bloodshed, by removing the hot-headed and overbearing, as well as those who, like Gunnar of Lithend, had fallen into quarrels for no fault of their own, for awhile from the scene of strife. The Icelandic codetook no pleasure in the death of a man, but ratheraimed at saving his life for the good of the land. In a state of society where the great chiefs who hadcauses of their own to defend, or causes of their Thingmen to protect, rode thither with many men at theirback, a private quarrel soon became that of a wholedistrict. So long as the two appeals to law and battlestood open, the party which felt itself weak at lawthought nothing of breaking up the court by forceof arms, and in Hrafnkell's case it is expressly statedthat he meant to teach these little men a lesson, whodared to strive at law with him, and called on hismen to follow him, and break up the court, and drive</p>
			<p>LAW AND LAWSUITS. clxvii</p>
			<p>Sam from the suit.* From several suits in Njal, as wellas from the fact of the battle at the Althing, after the suitfor the Burning itself, we see that this was a dangeralways to be dreaded, and therefore it was natural that the more peaceably disposed, and less hot-headed chiefs, “ the good men and true,” as they are termed, like Njal, Hall of the Side, Hjallti, Snorri the priest, and others, should ever be on the watch to step in and make mattersup, and stop a suit which might draw on a battle royalat any moment, or which, if carried out to the very letterof the law, might lead to local brawls in the attemptto put the sentence into execution. This no doubtwas Snorri’s feeling, when, as one of the daysmen orarbitrators, he told Gudmund the powerful that he wasfor awarding neither the greater nor the lesser outlawry. He would neither make Njal’s sons fjörbaugsmenn, norskógmenn, but inflict a fine which would settle thequarrel at once and for ever. This truth will come morefully home to the reader’s mind, if he reflects, that in allthe many lawsuits in Njal, not one was carried to itsfull length. They were all settled by the award of daysmen and arbitrators, who laid down such terms as they</p>
			<p>thought would meet the justice of each particular</p>
			<p>When such an award was uttered on any stage of the suit, the two sides were not thought fully atoned (allsáttir) until they had granted one another pledges ofpeace.* The formularies of these pledges are extremelyinteresting, and no doubt are some of the earliest documents of the kind in existence. The following is takenfrom one of the earliest Sagas,† and its original heathencharacter peeps out through the very slight Christiancovering which has been thrown over it. This was thepeace-telling that the worldly-wise Snorri got Thorgils, one of the greatest lawyers of the time, to utter in aquarrel.</p>
			<p>“This is the beginning of our peace-telling, that aswe are all atoned with God, so shall we be all menatoned and reconciled, the one to the other, at meat andat drink, at market and meeting, at church-door and inkingshall, and whatever place else men meet together. We shall be so agreed as though there had never beenquarrel between us. We shall share knife and steak, andall things else between us, as friends and not foes. If</p>
			<p>ATONEMENTS AND PLEDGES OF PEACE. clxix</p>
			<p>strife arises henceforth between us, then fines shall be paid, but not blade reddened ; but that man of our band whobreaks the peace now made, and slays after pledges given, he shall be driven away as a wolf, and chased so far as menchase wolves farthest, or as Christian men seek churches, heathen men worship in shrines, fires burn, earth bringsforth seed, maid calls ‘mother,’ ships skim the sea, shieldsshine, sunbeam melts snow, Finns glide on snowshoon, firgrows, hawk flies a summer day with a fair wind beneathboth his wings, heaven bends over us, earth is peopled, winds rise, waters run into the sea, and men sow corn. He shall be banished from churches and Christian men, from God’s house and soil, from every home save hell. Each of us takes pledges from the other, for himselfand his heirs, born and unborn, begotten and unbegotten, named and unnamed ; and each of us grants in histurn life-pledges and lasting pledges, meet pledges andmighty pledges, which shall ever be kept, so long asearth lasts and men live upon it. Now are we atonedand agreed, wherever we meet, on land or on lake, onship or on skate, on sea or on steed— ‘ Partners of oars, And partners of pumps, On thwart and at thole, If help there be needed.’ Agreed on even terms one with another, as son with</p>
			<p>father, or father with son, in all our dealings. Nowshake hands on our peace-telling, and so let us keepwell these pledges at Christ's will, and at the witnessof all men who have now heard our pledgetelling. Mayhe have God's love who keeps these pledges, and he God's wrath who breaks rightful pledges. We havebeen atoned with our whole hearts; and may God beatoned with all of us.&quot; The man who broke such solemn pledges as these, was looked upon as a dastardly truce-breaker (griðníð- íngr), and was looked upon as for ever dishonoured anddisgraced.*</p>
			<p>THE ICELANDERS ABROAD. clxxi</p>
			<h3>THE ICELANDERS ABROAD.</h3>
			<p>If we follow these islanders abroad, we shall findthat they were welcome wherever they went. In thecourts and body-guards of kings and earls no man ofmark amongst these Icelanders ever failed to prove hismentioned, however, that Gísli Brynjulfsson in his very ableessay, “Om Haavard og hans Viser,” appended to the new editionof Havard’s Saga, Kph. 1860, warmly expresses his agreement with Maurer on this point, and goes so far as to see in these lögmenna class invested with an authority resembling that exercised by the Roman tribunes, and representing a principle in the Icelandiccommonwealth antagonistic to the supremacy of the priests. Healso assumes that these lögmenn were the foremen (reifingarmenn) on the bench of judges, and that they were little Mimers, inwhose heads lay springs of legal knowledge and traditional lawwelling out for the good of the public, and he explains theexpression in Njála, “over the head of John,” vol. ii. p. 245, notas a standing name in the Icelandic formularies, answering to our M or N, but as referring to St. John’s head, who had succeededin Christian, to the part played by Mimer’s head in heathentimes. Whether this explanation be not more fanciful than trueis open to discussion ; but we must not omit to mention, that in the same passage Gísli Brynjulfsson has rightly pointed out that the “ kviðr” or “ inquest” must not be confounded with the English jury in its present shape. To that the Icelandic judgesrather answered. The kviðr, on the other hand, is very nearlyidentical with the old English jury de vicineto, whose functionswere rather to find the accused guilty on evidence which theythemselves brought before the court, than to find him guilty afterhearing the evidence of others. In our translation the difficultyhas been avoided by rendering the word “ kviðr” by “ inquest,”</p>
			<p>clxxii. THE ICELANDERS ABROAD.</p>
			<p>right to an honourable seat on one of the benches in thehall. Hrut, the good swordsman and foreseeing man, issoon received as one of King Harold Grayfell’s henchmen ; it is true he owed this honour to Gunnhilda’sfavour, but that patronage was thrust upon him by thepassion of that wicked queen, and he would have wonhis way to the king’s body-guard without her help. Gunnar is too proud to stand before Earl Hacon till hehas won fame for himself, and goes eastward ho, anddoes many deeds of derring do before he returns to standpeerless amongst the champions of King Harold Gorm’sson in Denmark, and afterwards to shine first and foremost among the followers of the wicked Earl. Njal’ssons, Grim and Helgi, are taken by Kari to Earl Sigurd’scourt on the mainland of Orkney, and there do the earlgood service by their foresight and strength of arm. When they left the Orkneys for Norway, we may feelsure that they would have been equally well receivedby Earl Hacon, had not Thrain’s treachery to his liegelord in harbouring his outlaw Hrapp, thrown them intoa quarrel which was none of their own seeking, and sospoilt their chance of honour at the court of Hladir.</p>
			<p>a body which in early times had legal functions answering prettymuch to those discharged by the Icelandic kviðr, and which inparochial and municipal matters still retains them in some partsof England at the present day.</p>
			<p>THE ICELANDERS ABROAD. clxxiii</p>
			<p>Even the overbearing Hrapp was welcome as an Icelander in Gudbrand’s hall, and had a seat of honourassigned him over against the high seat of the chief. Had he not betrayed his host, and dealt shamefully byhis daughter, he would have been welcome so long as hechose to stay, not only in obedience to that general law ofhospitality, to which he appealed, but much more for theamusement and information, which, as an Icelander, he was able to afford to the dwellers in that Norway dale. Lastly, when Flosi and the Burners fare abroad, and arethrown against their will upon the wild shore of Hrossey, as soon as the first burst of the Earl’s anger has passedaway, they are received into high favour, and Flosi fillsthe place in the body-guard which Helgi had held before. The gallant Kari had long been known in Orkney, hisfather Solmund, before he settled down on the Hrunamennahrepp on the south-west of Iceland, had lingeredin Orkney for a while after he left Norway, and thither Kari seems to have returned at an early age, and soon tohave made his way to fame and fortune. He was clearly astranger to Njal sons when they first met, and then filledthe dangerous office of Earl Hacon’s skatt-gatherer inthose Western lands.* From these, and numberless other</p>
			<p>instances, it is plain that the Icelanders were lookedupon as the first and foremost of the Scandinavian race.</p>
			<p>free and independent footing on which the Icelander, when abroad, stood with the princes of his time. It is a thoroughly genuine narrative, and occurs in the Saga of King Harold the stern, who fell at the battle of Stamford Bridge in 1066, and who showed more favourto Icelanders than any of the kings of Norway :—</p>
			<p>“ AUDUN AND HIS WHITE BEAR.</p>
			<p>“ There was a man named Audun, an Icelander and westfirther; his means were small, but his goodness was well known. This Audun once sailed from Iceland with a Norseman whose name was Thorir, but before he went he made over almost all his goods to hismother, and after all they were not more than enough to keep her fortwo years. After that they put to sea with a fair breeze, and soonmade Norway. Audun stayed with Thorir that winter, and nextsummer they both sailed out to Greenland, and were there the nextwinter. There Audun bought a white bear well tamed, and hegave for the beast all the money he had—for it was the greatesttreasure of a bear that had ever been heard of.</p>
			<p>“ Next summer they sailed back to Norway, and had a goodvoyage; as for Thorir, the captain, he went back to his own house; but Audun got himself a passage east to The Bay in the Cattegat, andtook his bear with him, and looked about for a lodging while hestayed there, for he meant to make his way south to Denmark, andgive the bear to King Sweyn. But just then the war and strifebetween King Harold and Sweyn was at its height. It happened, too, that Harold was then in the town whither Audun came, andhe soon heard how an Icelander had come from Greenland withsuch a tame white bear! The king sent at once for Audun, so hewent before the king and greeted him. The king took his wordswell, and asked—</p>
			<p>THE ICELANDERS ABROAD. clxxv</p>
			<p>They combined in a wonderful degree, the dash, anddaring, and genius of the Athenian, with the deliberate</p>
			<p>“ ‘Hast thou that white bear which is such a treasure?’ “ ‘I have,’ said Audun. “ The king said—‘Wilt thou sell us the beast for the same pricethou gavest for it?’ “ ‘I will not do that, lord,’ said Audun. “ ‘Wilt thou,’ says the king, ‘that I give thee twice as much, and that is fairer, if indeed thou gavest for it all thy money?’ “ ‘I will not do that, lord,’ he said. “ ‘Wilt thou give it me, then?’ says the king. “ ‘That, too, I will not do,’ says the Icelander. “ ‘What wilt thou do with it, then?’ said the king. “ Audun answers, ‘What I have already made up my mind todo; go south to Denmark, and give it to King Sweyn.’ “ Then King Harold said, ‘Is it now that thou art so ignoranta man that thou hast not heard of all this war and strife which isbetween the lands here, or dost thou think thy luck so great thatthou wilt be able to bring this treasure to King Sweyn when otherscannot get to his land without trouble, even when need forces them “ Audun answers, ‘Lord, this now lies in your power, but I willsay yes to no other way than the one I have already spoken of, andmade up my mind to follow.’ “ Then the king said: ‘I see no reason why thou shouldst not goas thou pleasest, but I make this bargain that thou comest here tome when thou gettest back, and tellest me how King Sweyn rewarded thee for the beast. May be thou art a man of luck.’ “ ‘I’ll give you my word to do that,’ said Audun. And awayhe went, and got a passage south to Denmark. But when he gotthere every penny of his money was spent, and he had to beg for</p>
			<p>valour and mother wit of the Spartan mind.* Theywere man by man, unit by unit, what their kinsmen</p>
			<p>THE ICELANDERS ABROAD. clxxvii</p>
			<p>in Normandy became afterwards as a nation,—boldas lions, but wary as foxes, tough as the ash, but pliant</p>
			<p>Norway, but before that I came from Greenland. My errand hitherwas to give you this white bear, which I bought out there in Greenland with all my goods; but a great change has befallen me, fornow I own no more than half the beast.’ “ After that he told the king the whole story, and all that passedbetween him and Auki. “ Then the king said: ‘ Is this true, Auki, what he says ?’ “ ‘ True it is,’ says Auki. “ Then the king said: ‘ And thoughtest thou it fell to thee, when I had set thee over my goods and given thee great place, to tax andtoll what an outlander and a stranger had undertaken to bring meas a treasure—who gave for it all his goods, and that too when ourgreatest foes thought it good to let him go on his way in peace? Think, now, how faithless it was in thee to do such a thing, and seewhat a great difference there is between thee and Harold, when hegave him safe conduct. And now it were meet thou shouldst lose, not only all thy goods, but thy life also; and though I will not slaythee this time, still thou shalt go away at once on the spot a beggarfrom my realm, and never come more únto my sight. But for thee, Icelander, as thou hast given me the whole of the beast, and thatworth far more than the food which Auki sold, but which he oughtto have given thee, I accept it, and ask thee to stay here with “ Then Audun thanked the king for his words and invitation, andstayed there awhile, but Auki went away unhappy, and lost greatgoods because he coveted that which did not belong to him. “ Audun had only been with King Sweyn a little while whenhe said he was eager to go away. The king was rather slow inanswering him.</p>
			<p>as the bow; no feat was too daring for their courageto attempt, and no race in any time, whether ancient</p>
			<p>“ ‘What wilt thou do, then?’ he asked, ‘if thou wilt not bewith us?’ “ ‘I will go south to Rome,’ he says. “ Then the king said: “ ‘Hadst thou not taken such good counsel, I had been veryangry at thy eagerness to go away, but now thou shalt not bethwarted in the least.’ “ So the king gave him much silver, and settled all about hisjourney, and put him in the way of going in company with otherpilgrims, and bade him to come to see him when he came back. “ So Audun went south; but when he was coming back he tooka great sickness, and lay long a-bed. All the money was spentwhich Sweyn had given him, and his companions went on and lefthim. At last he rose from his sickness, and was quite thin andweak, nor had he a penny to buy food. Then he took a beggar’swandering, and went along begging his food, till he came back to Denmark about Easter, to a town where King Sweyn happened tobe. By this time Audun had his hair close cropped, and scarce arag to his back, vile and poor in every way; and so he dared notshow himself among the throng of men. He hung about the cloistersof the church, and thought to choose his time to meet the king whenhe went to Nones; but when he saw the king coming and his trainso bravely dressed, he was ashamed to show himself before theireyes. But when the king had sat down to the board, Audun wentand took his meat outside under the wall of the hall, as is pilgrims’ wont, so long as they have not thrown away staff and scrip. Andnow he made up his mind to throw himself in the king’s way as hewent to even-song; but, so bold as this seemed to him earlier in theday, just half as bold again must he have been to let the king see</p>
			<p>THE ICELANDERS ABROAD. clxxix</p>
			<p>or modern, has ever shown greater aptness in suitingthemselves, at the shortest notice, to the peculiar cir-</p>
			<p>him now that they had well drunk. So, when Audun saw themcoming, he turned short off and ran away to hide himself. But theking thought he caught a glimpse of a man, and as he came out ofchurch, and all his train had come inside their lodging, he turnedround and went out again, and called out with a loud voice as soonas he was out of doors :— “ ‘If there be any man near here, as methinks there is, whowishes to see me, and has hardly heart to do so, let him come forward now and let himself be seen.’ “ Then Audun came forward, and fell at the king’s feet. Theking knew him at once, and took him by the hand and bade himwelcome. “ ‘ And now,’ he says, ‘ thou art greatly changed since we sawone another last, for I scarce knew thee!’ “ So the king led him into the hall there and then; but all theking’s train laughed at Audun as soon as they saw him. But theking said,— “ ‘ Ye have no need to laugh at him, vile and mean though heseems to ye to look on; he hath seen better to his soul’s healththan ye, and therefore to God’s eye he will seem bright and “ Then the king made them get ready a bath, and waited on himwith his own hands, and gave him afterwards good clothes, andmade much of him in every way. So Audun soon got back hisstrength and health, for he was young in years, and there he stayedawhile. He knew, too, how to behave himself among the crowd ofmen; he was an easy-tempered, word-weighing man, and not givento gossip. So all men liked him, and as for King Sweyn he wasmost gracious to him.</p>
			<p>cumstances of every case. The Saxons were no harehearted folk, their arms were as stalwart and their thews</p>
			<p>“ So it fell out one day, when springtide was drawing on, that they two were talking together, and all at once the king said,— “ ‘ Sooth to say, Audun, I have never yet repaid thee in a waythou wouldest like by a gift in return for the white bear. And now, if thou wilt, thou shalt be free to stay long here with me, and I willmake thee my henchman; and, at the same time, treat thee honourably in all things.’ “ Audun answers, ‘ God thank you, lord, for your generous offer, and for all the honour you show me, but I have set my heart onsailing out to Iceland.’ “ ‘ This seems to me a most wonderful choice,’ said the king. “ Then Audun said, ‘ I can’t bear to think that I am sitting herewith you in great honour and happiness, while my mother trampsabout on the beggar’s path out yonder in Iceland; for now the timeis up, during which I gave her means to live, before I sailed awayfrom home.’ “ ‘ Spoken like a good man and true,’ answers the king, ‘ andno doubt thou wilt be a man of luck. This was the only thingwhich would not have misliked me, if thou hadst asked leave to goaway. But now stay here awhile with me, till the ships are beinggot ready.’ “ So Audun stayed. But, one day, when the spring was near athand, King Sweyn went down from the town to the landing-place, and then they saw men busy fitting out their ships for various lands, —east to Russia, or to Saxony, to Sweden, or to Norway. So Audun and the king came to a fair ship, and men were hard at workon her: she was a merchantman of fine size. “ Then the king said, ‘ What thinkest thou, Audun, of this ship?’ “ He said, ‘ She was fine enough.’</p>
			<p>THE ICELANDERS ABROAD. clxxxi</p>
			<p>as strong as those of the men whom they met at Hastings, but their utmost efforts were powerless against the</p>
			<p>“ ‘ Now,’ said the king, ‘ I will repay thee for the bear, and givethee this ship with a full lading of all that I know is handiest in Iceland.’ “ Audun thanked the king, as well as he could, for this gift ; butwhen time went on, and the ship was ready for sea, they two wentdown again to the strand, King Sweyn and Audun. Then the kingspoke,— “ ‘ Since thou wilt go away from me, Icelander, nothing shall nowbe done to hinder thee ; but I have heard tell that your land is illoff for havens, and that there are great shoals and risks for ships ; and now, if things do not turn out well, it may be that thy ship goesto pieces, and thy lading will be lost ; little then will be left to showthat thou hast met King Sweyn, and given him a thing of great price.’ “ As he said this, the king put into his hand a big leathern bag, full of silver, and said, ‘ Thou wilt not be now altogether pennilessthough thy ship goes to pieces, if thou only holdest this.’ “ ‘ May be, too,’ the king went on to say, ‘ that thou losest thismoney also, what good will it then have been to thee that thougavest King Sweyn thy treasure ? ’ “ As he said this, the king drew a ring of gold from his arm, andgave it to Audun ; that was a thing of costly price, and the kingwent on— “ ‘ Though things go so ill, that thy ship goes to pieces, and allthy goods and money be lost, still thou wilt not be penniless, ifthou comest to land with this ring, for it is often the wont of mento bear their gold about them, when they are in risk of shipwreck, and so it will be seen that thou hast met King Sweyn Wolfson, ifthou holdest fast the ring, though thou losest the rest of thy goods. And now I will give thee this bit of advice, never to part with this</p>
			<p>serried ranks and improved tactics of Duke William andhis knights. The inert mass of Saxon nationality fell</p>
			<p>ring, for I wish thee to enjoy it to the uttermost, unless thouthinkest thyself bound to repay so much goodness to some greatman as to deem it right that thou shouldest give him a great treasure. When thou findest such an one give him the ring, for it isworth a great man's while to own it; and now farewell, and luckfollow thy voyage.' That was what King Sweyn said. &quot; After that Audun put to sea, and ran into a haven in Norway, and as soon as he heard where King Harold was he setout to find him, as he had given his word. So Audun camebefore King Harold and greeted him, and the king took his greetingkindly. &quot; ' Sit here now and drink with us,' said the king. &quot; So Audun sat and drank. Then King Harold asked, ' Well, how did King Sweyn repay thee for the white bear ?' &quot; ' In that wise, lord,' says Audun, ' that he took it when I gave it.' &quot; ' In that wise I had repaid thee myself,' says the king. ' Whatmore did he give thee ?' &quot; ' He gave me silver to go south on pilgrimage.' &quot; The king answers: ' King Sweyn has given many a manbefore now silver to go south on pilgrimage, or to help his need, though he had not brought him things of price. What hast thoumore to say ?' &quot; ' He asked me,' answers Audun, ' to become his henchman, and to give me great honour if I stayed with him.' &quot; ' That was well spoken,' says the king; ' but he must haverepaid thee with more still.' &quot; Audun said: ' He gave me a big merchantman, full laden with the best of freight.'</p>
			<p>THE ICELANDERS ABROAD. clxxxiii</p>
			<p>never to rise again on that blood-stained field, while thebanners of the Bastard’s chivalry passed lightly over itfrom victory to victory, until they had made the wholeland their own. The few names which we have marked on our mapof the Western Lands will show how thoroughly the Northman had made himself at home on British soil. The monks of Scilly in the far-west well knew, whenthey first sighted them in the offing, what the sails of</p>
			<p>“ ‘That was a noble gift,’ says the king, ‘but I would havegiven thee as much; or did he give thee anything more?’ “ Audun answers: ‘He gave me, besides, a leathern bag full ofsilver, and said I would not then be penniless if I held fast to it, though my ship went to pieces off Iceland.’ “ ‘That was nobly thought of,’ answers the king, ‘and that I would not have done. I should have thought myself free if I hadgiven thee ship and lading. Gave he aught besides?’ “ ‘Yes, lord, he did,’ says Audun; ‘he gave me this ring which I have on my arm, and said it might so happen that I lost all mygoods and the ship too, and yet he said I should not be penniless if I still had the ring. He bade me also not to part with the ringunless I thought that I owed so much to some great man for hisgoodness that I ought to give it him; but now I have found thatman, for it was in your power, lord, to take my bear from me, andmy life too, but you let me go in peace to Denmark when no oneelse could get thither.’ “ The king took the ring blithely, and gave Audun good gifts inreturn before they parted. So Audun sailed to Iceland that verysummer, and all thought him the luckiest of men.”</p>
			<p>a Viking fleet foreboded ; but it was at Scilly that thegreatest of all Vikings, Olaf Tryggvi’s son, afterwards King Olaf of Norway, first learnt the Christian’s creed, became converted at the teaching of those pious monks, and passed at once from the heathen sea-rover to themost zealous champion of the Cross. Ireland knewthem, Bretland or Wales knew them, England knewthem too well, and a great part of Scotland they hadmade their own. To this day the name of almost everyisland on the west coast of Scotland is either pure Norse, or Norse distorted so as to make it possible for Celticlips to utter it. The groups of Orkney and Shetland arenotoriously Norse, but Lewes and the Uists, and Skyeand Mull are no less Norse ; and not only the names of the islands themselves, but those of reefs and rocks andlakes and headlands* bear witness to the same relation, and show that, while the original inhabitants were notexpelled, but held in bondage as thralls, the Northmenmust have dwelt, and dwelt thickly upon them too, asconquerors and lords. The end of most conquests indeed is the same : time always asserts her sway, and theconquerors, a mere handful amongst the great mass of thepopulation, after leavening it with the best particles of their nature, and infusing a new life into the com-</p>
			<p>THE ICELANDERS ABROAD. clxxxv</p>
			<p>munity, take to themselves the features and languageof the subject race; until after a separate existence, determined in its duration by the peculiar circumstancesof each case, a new language and nationality are formed, in which the characteristics of the captives are predominant.</p>
			<h3>CONCLUSION.</h3>
			<p>And now, after having sketched the physical features of the island, pointed out its first discoverers, explained how it was that the Northmen settled on it, dwelt on their faith, their social principles, their methodof settlement, their priesthoods, and petty kingdoms; having shown how they passed into a commonwealth, how they assumed a State and Provincial organization ; having given an account of the great families whichsettled in the district to which our Saga more particularly belongs; having brought the chief characters on thestage, and given a rapid outline of the chronology andplot of the piece; having shown how the Icelander in the eleventh century was housed and lodged, how hespent his time, whether at home in his daily life, or yearby year in the great gatherings on the Thingfield; havingtraced the topography of that interesting spot, the veryheart of the Icelandic body politic, threaded the dark</p>
			<p>labyrinths of Icelandic law, and then followed those bold Icelanders abroad to the courts of Kings and Earls ;— after all these proofs and proceedings have been broughtin, to use the language of Mord at the trial for the Burning, nothing remains but to sum up the whole case, and to state a few of its broad features before calling on the public, that great inquest of the country, to uttertheir finding in Njal's favour, and to say that he is worthyof the pains which have been bestowed on his behalf. We are entitled to ask, then, in what work of any ageare the characters so boldly, and yet so delicately drawn ? Where shall we match the goodness and manliness of Gunnar, struggling with the storms of fate, and drivenon by the wickedness of Hallgerda into quarrel afterquarrel, which were none of his own seeking, but ledno less surely to his own end ? Where shall we match Hallgerda herself—that noble frame, so fair and tall, and yet with so foul a heart, the abode of all greatcrimes, and also the lurking place of tale-bearingand thieving ? Where shall we find parallels to Skarphedin's hastiness and readiness, as axe aloft, heleapt twelve ells across Markfleet, and glided on tosmite Thrain his death-blow on the slippery ice ? where for Bergthora's love and tenderness for her husband, she who was given young to Njal, and could not</p>
			<p>find it in her heart to part from him when the houseblazed over their heads? where for Kari’s dash andgallantry, the man who dealt his blows straightforward, even in the Earl’s hall, and never thought twice aboutthem? where for Njal himself, the man who never dippedhis hands in blood, who could unravel all the knottypoints of the law; who foresaw all that was coming, whether for good or ill, for friend or for foe; who knewwhat his own end would be, though quite powerless toavert it; and when it came, laid him down to his rest, and never uttered sound or groan, though the flamesroared loud around him? Nor are the minor charactersless carefully drawn, the scolding tongue of Thrain’s firstwife, the mischief-making Thiostolf with his pole-axe, which divorced Hallgerda’s first husbands, Hrut’s swordmanship, Asgrim’s dignity, Gizur’s good counsel, Snorri’scommon sense and shrewdness, Gudmund’s grandeur, Thorgeir’s thirst for fame, Kettle’s kindliness, Ingialld’sheartiness, and, though last not least, Bjorn’s boastfulness, which his gudewife is ever ready to cry down—are allsketched with a few sharp strokes which leave their markfor once and for ever on the reader’s mind. Strange! wereit not that human nature is herself in every age, that suchforbearance and forgiveness as is shown by Njal and Hauskuld and Hall, should have shot up out of that social</p>
			<h3>HEATHEN CHRISTIANITY</h3>
			<p>soil, so stained and steeped with the blood-shedding ofrevenge. Revenge was the great duty of Icelandic life, yet Njal is always ready to make up a quarrel, thoughhe acknowledges the duty, when he refuses in his lastmoments to outlive his children, whom he feels himself unable to revenge. The last words of Hauskuld, when he was foully assassinated through the tale-bearingof Mord, were, “God help me and forgive you;” norbrightly than in Hall, who, when his son Ljot, theflower of his flock, fell full of youth, and strength, andpromise, in chancemedley at the battle on the Thingfield, at once for the sake of peace gave up the father’s and thefreeman’s dearest rights, those of compensation and revenge, and allowed his son to fall unatoned in order thatpeace might be made. This struggle between the principle of an old system now turned to evil, and that of anew state of things which was still fresh and good, between heathendom as it sinks into superstition, and Christianity before it has had time to become superstitious, stands strongly forth in the latter part of the Saga ; but as yet the new faith can only assert its forbearanceand forgiveness in principle. It has not had time, except in some rare instances, to bring them into play indaily life. Even in heathen times such a deed as that</p>
			<p>BRIAN’S BATTLE. clxxxix</p>
			<p>by which Njal met his death, to hem a man in within his house and then to burn it and him together, to chokea freeman, as Skarphedinn says, like a fox in his earth, was quite against the free and open nature of the race ; and though instances of such foul deeds occur besidesthose two great cases of Blundkettle and Njal, still theywere always looked upon as atrocious crimes and punishedaccordingly. No wonder, therefore, then that Flosi, afterthe Change of Faith, when he makes up his mind tofire Njal’s house, declares the deed to be one for whichthey would have to answer heavily before God, “ seeingthat we are Christian men ourselves.” But it is at Clontarf, in Brian’s battle, that the oldand new faith met in the lists, face to face, for their laststruggle. King Sigtrygg and his mother Kormlada, thewoman who had all good gifts only to make every baduse of them, may or may not have been Christians, buttheir Christianity, if they confessed that faith, did notshrink from summoning to their aid against the good King Brian, the champion of Christianity, Brodir the Viking,* the apostate deacon, and the most stubbornheathen of his time. Earl Sigurd of Orkney was a</p>
			<p>Christian in name, but we know from the account of hisconversion, which is to be found in the Orkney Saga, how he only yielded to the preaching of King Olaf Tryggvi’s son, when that zealous missionary monarchhad him entirely in his power, and at last threatenedto hew off his son’s head before his eyes over the bulwarks of his ship. That Earl Sigurd was still a heathenat heart when he fared on the armada against King Brian, is clear from the fact, that he still had borne in the front of his battle array his famous raven banner, wrought by his mother with mighty spells, which was tobring victory to the host before whom it fluttered, butdeath to the man by whose hands it was borne.* Along</p>
			<p>en Stammes I. 558, note, who hazards a conjecture that Brodirmay be the Danish sea-king Gutring (Guðormr ?), mentionedby Thietmar of Merseburg, who died in 1018, as having beenordained a deacon, but who afterwards relapsed to heathendom.</p>
			<p>BRIAN'S BATTLE. cxci</p>
			<p>with the great Orkney Earl came a great gathering of his chiefs and followers, called to the war from everyisland on the Scottish Main from Unst to Arran, beatenblades who had followed the descendant of Thorfinn theskull-splitter, in many a roving cruise,—half heathenhalf Christian men, who trusted perhaps to the sign of the cross on land, and to Thor's holy hammer on shipboard,—scarce knowing to what creed they belonged, but well knowing that it was the duty of a brave warriorand faithful henchman to follow his liege lord wheneverhe launched his galleys for a Viking voyage. Alongwith these island levies came, as we know, many Icelanders of the best blood in the land. Flosi wouldhave gone himself, but the Earl would have none of hiscompany, as he had his pilgrimage to Rome to fulfil, butfifteen of the Burners went to the fray, and Thorstein Hall of the Side's son, and Halldor, the son of Gudmund the powerful, and many other northern champions</p>
			<p>who bears it.' The banner was made with mickle handcunningand famous skill. It was made in raven's shape, and when the windblew out the banner, then it was as though the raven flapped hiswings for flight.&quot; For Earl Sigurd's nominal conversion to Christianity, see ch. 12, vol. i. p. 31 foll. of the new edition of the Orkney Saga. For Ragnar Hairybreeks' standard of the like kind, see Asser, Gesta Aelfredi, p. 481. Comp. Maurer Die Bekehrung des</p>
			<p>of lesser note. On the side of King Brian* was arrayedthe whole chivalry of Ireland, except those partswhich owned the sway of Scandinavian conquerors. As leaders of that host came the aged King himself, the</p>
			<p>BRIAN’S BATTLE. cxciii</p>
			<p>kindest hearted and most just of men, and his sons, ownor adopted, Wolf the quarrelsome, and Kerthialfad,* andhis new Christian convert Ospak Brodir’s brother, who</p>
			<p>O'Brien in his Dictionary thinks, from Borumha, a town close to Kincora—consisted of 300 cows with brass yokes ; 300 steeds ; 300 gold-hilted swords ; and 300 purple cloaks, which were paid by thepeople of Leinster as a fine for having sided with the Northmen. He is also said to have forced the Northmen in Limerick to pay him 365 pipes of red wine, and those in Dublin 150 pipes. Out of Kincora, or Cean Corradh, as it is written in the Irish Annals, the Icelandic Saga writer has made in one MS. Kantaraborg, for Kankaraborg, and thus confounded Kincora with the English Canterbury, atown better known to Northmen. Another MS., which has beenfollowed in our translation, reads Kunjattaborg, Connaught, but Brian ruled in Munster. See, for the life of Brian, “The Annals of Ireland ;” Dublin, 1846, pp. 147-8, 220, 508-16, a work which contains a vast amount of information on ancient Ireland, collectedfrom the Annals of the Four Masters, the Annals of Innisfail, andother sources. For the mistakes in the Icelandic MSS., see Munch Det Norske Folks Historie, ii. 644, who has gone through the Irishand Northern authorities for the Battle of Clontarf with great care. The account in our Saga was probably drawn from the accountsbrought home by Thorstein Hall of the Side’s son, who, as Munchwell remarks, was uncle of Oddi Kol’s son, who again, was thegreat authority of Ari the learned as to the history of the North. It was a family in which such stories as that of Brian’s Battle werenot likely to die out. Comp. Munch N. H., ii., 648.</p>
			<p>had quitted the impious rites of his heathen faith, andhastened to warn the venerable monarch of his dangeron the very eve of the invasion. Nor were signs andportents wanting, before and after that bloody fight, tomark that more was at stake than the mere ascendancyof this or that line of kings. Clouds of the sky shedboiling blood, and birds of the air flocked to strangeconflicts as the awful day approached; swords flew from their scabbards, and spears poised themselves in air, wielded by no earthly hands against the Viking band. King Sigtrygg's stronghold was the fort at Dublin, nearthe bridge, and thither by Palm Sunday the wholeheathen host had met; but Brian, warned in time by Ospak, was not only ready to meet them should theyfall upon him, but ready to march against and fall upon them. He too, on Palm Sunday, had gathered the Christian host in his leaguer at Clontarf, and so the twoarmies lay watching one another through Passion Week. Brodir, skilled in sorcery, betook himself to his blackarts, and from the first got little comfort either forhimself or his brothers in arms. If the battle werefought before Good Friday the heathen host wouldbe utterly routed and lose its chiefs, but if thestruggle were delayed till Good Friday, then King Brian would fall, but still win the day. On Good</p>
			<p>Friday, then, which fell in 1014 on the 18th of April, the heathen made up their minds to fight; and thatnothing might be wanting to stamp the struggle with the seal of the ancient faith, Odin himself, as the legenddarkly hints, rode up, as we are told in many likestories, on an apple-gray horse, holding a halbertin his hand, and held a council of war with Kormlada, King Sigtrygg, and the other chiefs. One of the lastappearances of the God of Battles struggling with thefate which now at last had overtaken him, and helpinghis own on the very eve of battle with his comfort andadvice.* Nor were other tokens wanting. In Icelanditself, at Swinefell, where Flosi and the Burners had solong stayed, blood burst out on the Priest’s vestmentson Good Friday, and at Thvattwater, Hall’s abode, on the same day, the Priest saw an abyss open hard by the altar as he sang mass, in which were strangeand awful things. The northern mind plainly longlooked on Brian’s battle as a blow that went home</p>
			<p>to the heart of many a household. In Caithness, and in other parts of the west, the Valkyries, Odin’scorse-choosing maidens, were seen, twelve of them ridingtogether, dismounting, entering a bower, setting up theirmystic loom, and there weaving out of the entrails ofmen, with swords for their shuttles, that grim Woof of War,* which is at once one of the last, as it is one of thegrandest flights of the Scandinavian Swan-maiden, ereshe wings her way for ever from the world, together with the faith to which she and that wild strain of melodybelonged. The fight itself, and its issue, may be bestread in the pages of our Saga, but we may note that the struggle of the two faiths is carried on throughout the day, until at last the champions of neithercreed can claim a complete victory. The song of the Valkyries themselves, as well as the way in which theytear the weird woof asunder, and hasten half of themone way and half another, show that though their leaning was all for the young King Sigtrygg “of the silkenbeard,” and though, according to the old faith, victorywas foredoomed for him, yet that now, when struggling</p>
			<p>BRIAN’S BATTLE. cxcvii</p>
			<p>with a new and better belief, their spells and soothsaying were powerless to win the day, and could onlyavail to make the battle drawn. Thus it is that Brodir, that stout champion on whose mail no sword wouldbite, is overthrown at the thrust of Kerthialfad’s Christian spear; and felled, not once but thrice, loses allfaith in his heathen harness, and flies like a felon to the wood, only to issue from it twice a felon, to take thelife of the Christian king. Here, in its turn, heathensorcery had spoken the truth, for Brian fell, but fellonly after the victory was won. So too, with Sigurd’sraven banner, one half, and the greater half, of its charmwas broken, when it advanced against the array ofwarriors who trusted in a purer faith; it did not win the day for the host before whom it was borne, but thelesser half of its mystic nature asserted its sway, forit was the death of every man who bore it on thatblood-stained field, until the turn came to the Earl himself, and he fell, thrust through with a spear, havingwound the banner round his body. Almost ludicrousare the words of Rafn the red, who, though a Christian, had joined Earl Sigurd’s host, but more wise thanothers of his followers, had refused to bear the Earl’sdevil, as he called his banner, bidding him bear it himself. We are told that this Rafn, as he fled from the</p>
			<p>field, being in danger of drowning, and fancying he sawthe fiends about to drag him down to the depths below, invoked St. Peter's aid, and made a vow that he, the Apostle's dog, would run a third time to Rome on apilgrimage, if the saint would help him out of thisstrait. So strangely did the bright day-beams of therising sun of Christianity shine through the dark cloudswhich overspread the heathen night, when every instantthe victory of the new faith became more certain ; butat the moment of which we write, the struggle betweenlight and darkness was still raging throughout the North, just as it raged with doubtful issue on thatmemorable Good Friday throughout the great Battle of Clontarf. The age of miracles was then long past, and Providence then as now submitted to the trammelsof time and space, and having both time enough andspace enough, did everything surely, but nothing in ahurry ; the Christian reader, therefore, must neither besurprised nor shocked to learn, as he will most assuredlylearn if he reads this Saga aright, that the pure doctrines of Christianity were then merely the possessionof a few, while the creed of the common herd was littlemore than a garbled blending of the most jarring tenetsand wildest superstitions of both faiths. One word and we must bring this introduction to</p>
			<p>CONCLUSION. cxcix</p>
			<p>an end ; it is merely to point out how calmly and peacefully the Saga ends, with the perfect reconciliation of Kari and Flosi, those generous foes, who throughoutthe bitter struggle in which they were engaged alwaystreated each other with respect. It is a comfort to find, after the whole fitful story has been worked out, afterpassing from page to page, every one of which reekswith gore, to find that after all there were even inthat bloodthirsty Iceland of the tenth century suchthings as peaceful old age and happy firesides, and thatmen like Flosi and Kari, who had both shed so muchblood, one in a good and the other in a wicked cause, should after all die, Flosi on a trading voyage, an Icelandic Ulysses, in an unseaworthy ship, good enough, as he said, for an old and death-doomed man, Kari athome, well stricken in years, blest with a famous andnumerous offspring, and a proud but loving wife.</p>
			<section epub:type="endnotes">
				<hr/>
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Notes</h3>
				</header>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-1">Njála, the teller of which only handled the history of the Dales- men so far as he needed it for his story, passes quickly over the quarrels of the half-brothers. We know from Laxdæla that they had many differences, and those of a far more prosaic and every- day kind than this soothsaying of Hrut. In the same way, in order</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-2">Mord, though he died soon after, and though he is called by his daughter “an old man,” could not have been much more than sixty at the time. This is clear, both from the date of Sighvat’s coming to Iceland, as well as from the fact that it would have been thought disgraceful in Hrut to challenge a man worn out with years to fight. At sixty in those days, a man was thought to be still hale and hearty, and fit for anything.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-3">The slaying of Swart, 975; the slaying of Kol, 976; the slaying of Atli, 977; the slaying of Brynjolf the unruly, 978; and the slay- ing of Sigmund the white and Skjold, 979.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-4">The custom of the Sagateller, to clear the way by telling as much as possible about a family when one member is mentioned, is likely to mislead the reader as to the age of Njal's sons. Thus, after he has mentioned Njal and his children, told their names and described their aspect with a minuteness from which it would be possible to paint the very men, he goes on to tell us whom they married, and gets rid of that interesting subject with regard to all of them at once. It is, however, plain, that they were not married till long after, and that they were not grown men till about the time of Sigmund's slaying in 979. Guðbrandr Vigfússon thinks that the eldest of them, and he thinks Helgi was the eldest, was not much more than twenty at that time. If the Thorhalla, Asgrim Ellidagrim's son's daughter, mentioned at the quarrel between Hallgerda and Bergthora, was really Helgi's wife, and not Thorkatla, her mother, Asgrim's wife, Helgi must not only have been the eldest, but must have been married very young. There seems to have been some doubt about the matter, for the Saga sometimes calls Helgi's wife Thorhalla and sometimes Thorkatla.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-5">Literally the &quot;Ogre of war.&quot;</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-6">He was the son of Lambi, another of Fiddle Mord's brothers. Sigmund had other brothers, who throughout the story throw in their lot with the sons of Sigfus their first cousins.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-7">Neither Hauskuld Dale-Kolli's son, nor any of the chiefs of the Dales in the West are mentioned in 785 at the Althing, when Gunnar stood in great need of their help. The year before both Hauskuld and Hrut were there. The year after, 786, Olof the peacock, Hauskuld's showy son, invited from the Hill of Laws all the great men of the land to his famous arvel feast, as it would still be called in the north of England; that is, to the feast which all heirs gave on succession, and at which they drank themselves into their father's estate. Mord Valgard's son gives such a feast in our Saga on the death of his father Valgard the guileful, see ch. 107, vol. ii., p. 103. Gunnar no doubt was asked by his brother-in-law to ride west, but if he was there, the feast must have taken place rather earlier in the summer than the time mentioned in Laxdæla, &quot;when the summer would be still alive ten weeks,&quot; that is, when there were still ten summer weeks left; for in that year Gunnar was at a feast at Tongue, when there were eight weeks left of summer, and the fight at Knafahills took place on his return home.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-8">Some difficulty occurs, however, with regard to the history of Mord Valgard's son,—the wicked son of a wicked sire,—the greatest villain, perhaps, in all Icelandic story, and one who, throughout our Saga, is the very counterpart of Loki in the mythology of the race. We know that Valgard the guileful only married Unna about 971. Mord was born in 972 at earliest. He was therefore not twelve years old when he gave his crafty counsel to Otkel about the cheese. If so, he was a very forward lad. We must add, however, that there are many instances in the Sagas of such forwardness; that twelve years was the time fixed for majority by the Icelandic law, and that at fourteen years of age a lad might betroth himself. We hear so little of Valgard the guileful, who seems to have spent most of his life abroad, that one is almost tempted to fancy that the Saga has attributed some of the father's crafty counsel to his son. Mord's marriage with Thorkatla, Gizur the white's daughter, the only being whom he seemed to have loved except himself, took place in 986, as soon as ever he had attained the legal age. After all, therefore, it may only be the difficulty which we should have in believing such a story nowadays which makes us less inclined to believe events which may have been perfectly natural in another age, and another state of society.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-9">“Dipwater,” “Washwater,” so called probably from the immer- sion of the Icelanders in the stream when they were baptized.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-10">See the account of Snorri's famous speech in the Kristni Saga (Biskupa Sögur, I. p. 22, Kaupmannahöfn, 1858). &quot;Then came a man running and said that a stream of lava (earthfire, jarðeldr) had burst out at Ölfus, and would run over the homestead of Thorod the priest. Then the heathen men began to say, 'No wonder that the</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-11">See the account of his coming to Njal in the Saga. It was clearly a made-up matter between Njal and Kettle that the boy should pass from his mother's house to the Mark, and thence to Bergthorsknoll.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-12">The byre, which always stood near to the house, was called fjós, and from this there was sometimes, as we see from Gisli Sur's son's Saga and Droplaugarsona Saga, an entrance into the skáli.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-13">See Gisli Súr's son's Saga, Copenhagen, 1849, p. 88, where the skáli or hall, answering to the sitting-room; and the stokkabúr, a storehouse built of logs, were clearly separate buildings.  This was in Norway, but the houses in Iceland and the houses in Norway were built on the same plan, except that the walls in Iceland were stone or turf, while in Norway, wood was the material used.  See also in Njála, ch. 48, vol. i. p. 163, where Otkel says the cause of the fire which burnt down his storehouse, útibúr, was that it stood next to</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-14">Some of these buildings were a hundred ells or more long, such as Gísli’s eldhús at Hól, which was a hundred ells long, and Bjarni Skeggbroddi’s son’s eldhús at Crosswick in the East, which was thirty-five fathoms long, fourteen ells high, and fourteen ells wide. From the size of his hall he was called Bjarni longhouse.—Land- náma, pp. 324, Kph., 1843. It must be remembered that as the Sagas were not written down till the middle of the twelfth and the thirteenth centuries, the writers often apply the terms for houses used in their time to buildings of earlier date. In the twelfth century men began to live more comfortably, and broke up their large halls into separate compartments. Thus a portion of the skáli at the upper end, where the pall or dais was, was shut off, and called stof a. Thus, Sturlúnga Saga, 5, 3, in the house at Sauðafell, mention is made of going “out of the skáli and into the stof a,” where Solveiga, who had just had a child, slept with her mother, while the rest of the household slept in the skáli. So, also, in the same Saga, 5, 27, at Micklabæ, mention is made of an almanna- stof a, a common hall or skáli, and a little stof a or parlour. An in- stance of the confusion caused by a twelfth century scribe writ- ing about the tenth century, occurs in our Saga, where, ch. 115, vol. ii. p. 121, it is said that Flosi went into the stof a or sitting-</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-15">Between the rows of Pillars and Posts which supported the centre and side In the Passages between the Pillars were Sleeping Places for the Household. The Sigurðr Guðmundsson del.t Reykjavik Edmonston &amp; Doug</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-16">Also called brandadyrr, postdoor, or pillardoor, from the side- posts which distinguished it from the women’s door, and which may be seen in the plan.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-17">It has been thought by some that the lokrekkja, pl. lokrekkjur, was merely a press bed; but that it clearly was an enclosed space, a bed-room, in fact, with a door opening into it through the wain- scot, is plain, not only from several passages in Njála, but also from the following striking account in Gísli Súr's son's Saga. Gísli's fos- ter brother had been slain by murder, lönvig, and he, Gísli, pro- ceeds to take vengeance in the same way. &quot;Now Gísli goes inside along the hall and up to their shut bed, inside which Thorgrim and Thordísa, Gísli's sister, slept, and the door of the shut bed was ajar. Then Gísli goes up into the shut bed and feels about him; he laid his hand on Thordísa's breast, for she slept on the outside&quot;—(nærr stokki; comp. Sturl. I., 207, c., hvárt vilt þú hvíla vid stokk eða þili. wilt thou sleep on the outside of the bed, i.e., nearest the rail, or on the inside, i.e., against the wainscot, showing that the bedstead was pushed close up to the wainscot at the back of the bedroom).— &quot;Thordísa spoke and said—' Why was thy hand so cold, Thorgrim?' for she thought that he had laid it over her. Then Gísli warms his hand in his shirt, and stands still meanwhile on the floor of the bed-room (í hvílugólfinu), and now he lays his hand upon Thorgrim's</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-18">In Fagrskinna, Christ. 1847, pp. 149, 150 (Olafs saga kyrrat), we read the following :—“Þat var forneskju siðr í Noregi ok í Danmörku ok svá í Svíaveldi, þar sem váru konúngsbúi ok veiz- lustofur, váru dyrr á báðum endum stofunnar, en konúngs hásæti var á miðjum lángbekk þann, er vissi móti sólu; sat þar drottning á vinstri hönd konúngi, ok var þat þá kallat öndvegi, ok sá sess vegligastr hvárntveggja veg út ífrá til karla ok kvenna, er næst var öndvegi, en sá úvegligastr er næst var durum. Hinn</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-19">Cfr Formmanna Sögur vi. and Heimskringla.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-20">Earl Sigurd’s hall in the Orkneys was arranged in the good old fashion. See our Saga, ch. 153, vol. ii. pp. 324, where the Earl puts</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-21">See Laxdæla, ch. xxix. p. 114, where famous stories are said to have been carved on the wood of the wainscot (á þilividi- num), and on the timbers of the roof, and “that carved work was so well wrought, that the hall was thought much more grand when the hangings were down than when they were up.” This shews that Olaf the peacock’s carvings must have come lower down the wainscot than those shewn in our sketch; but this was, of course, a mere matter of taste. For the value set on hangings, see, amongst other passages, that in Gísli Súr’s son’s Saga. Pp. 111, 112. Kaupmh.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-22">See the pretty story, which, though long, is worth telling. Gísli Súr’s son’s Saga. Pp. 96, 97. Kaupmh. 1849. “Thorkell Súr’s son was a great man for show, and a very lazy fellow, and did little or nothing in the way of work for their household, but Gísli worked day and night. Once there was a good drying day, and so Gísli set all the men hard at work haymaking, save his brother Thorkell. He was the only one of the men at home, and had gone and laid him down in the hall after breakfast to sleep. Outside, and on the southside away from the hall, stood the bower of the two sisters-in-law, Auð and Asgerda, and there they sat and sewed. So Thorkell went thither and lay down in the sun, by the bower. Then Asgerda began to speak. ‘Do help me Auð,’ she says, ‘and cut out a shirt for my husband Thorkell.’ ‘I can’t do that better than thou,’ said Auð, ‘nor wouldst thou beg me to do so, if it were for my brother Vestein.’ ‘Ah,’ says Asgerda, ‘as to Vestein, that’s quite another thing, and so I sometimes think, and indeed I love him more than Thorkell my husband, though we shall never come together.’ ‘I have known for a long time,’ said Auð, ‘what Thorkell thought about that, and how it all came about, so let us not speak any more of it!’ ‘Why,’ says Asgerda, ‘I look upon it as no harm, though I think Vestein a good fellow; besides I have heard it said that thou and Thorgrim’ (a next door neigh- bour), ‘often had meetings before thou wert given away in marriage.’ ‘Very true,’ said Auð, ‘but no harm came of it to any one, and I never set my heart on any other man than Gísli, so that any dis- honour followed; and now,’ says Auð, ‘let us cease this talk.’ So they stopped talking; but Thorkell had heard every word they said, and now he began to speak—‘Hearken now to a great won- der! listen to a big lie! hear now what I say, this shall be one man’s death or more;’ and with that he goes off. Then Auð began</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-23">Whatever may be the doubt that now exists as to whether grain—that is, either rye or oats—will grow in Iceland, there can be no question at all that in early times corn did grow in many parts of the island. Below the homestead at Lithend lay &quot;Acretongue,&quot;— that is the tongue or spit of arable land which an arm of Markfleet has now nearly torn away; but in Gunnar's time it was this piece of land which was white to harvest, that made him turn back from his banishment. In his corn field, too, Gunnar is busy sowing when Otkell rides over him; and Hauskuld the Whiteness priest is slain in the gray spring morning by his assassins while hard at the same work. But it is needless to heap quotation on quotation to support what must be well known to every reader of the Sagas.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-24">Perhaps the most instructive of all the cases of hayneed was that of Blundkettle, in Hænsa Þórir's Saga (Íslend. Sög. ii., p. 131, and foll. Copenhagen, 1847), where the whole question, as well as the means taken to avert it by slaughtering as many of the horses and cattle in the autumn as would save the lives of the rest during the winter, are fully described. Here, too, like Gunnar, Blundkettle has to deal with a rich churl, Hænsa Þórir, Chicken-Thorir, but, unlike Gunnar, Blundkettle takes the hay, and leaves the price in its stead. Hence a feud arises, in the course of which Blundkettle is</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-25">See Finn Magnusen's Treatise Om de Gamle Skandinavers Inddeling af Dagens Tider. Kjöbenhavn, 1844, p. 38, foll ; a work of very grea interest and research. Compare also Ljósvetnínga Saga, ch. viii.; Ísfirðinga Saga, pp. 38-52; Heiðarvíga Saga (Ís- lend. Sög. i.), pp. 273, 283, 288; and Sturlúnga Saga, i., p. 78.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-26">It may be as well to mention here that the loom used by the Icelanders in the twelfth century and which is still used, we believe, in Iceland at the present day, as well as in Shetland, and in some other parts of the north, was a fixed upstanding loom, in the upper part of which was a roller, round which the woof, as fast as it was woven, was wound up and withdrawn from the loom. It was on such a loom that Daurrud saw the Valkyries or Corse-choosing maidens at work in Caithness before Brian's battle, while they sung that grim song &quot;The Woof of War.&quot; This explains the words &quot;Wind we, wind swiftly, our war-winning woof.&quot; As fast as the weird woof was woven it was wound round the roller and withdrawn. Comp. Olavius (Olafsen), &quot;Reise igjennem Island,&quot; Kph. 1780, ii. 630, where a description and plate of the old Icelandic loom will be found.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-27">“ Hón (Þórhildr) gekk at beina ok Bergþóra Skarphéðinsdóttir kona Njáls.”</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-28">The ale was very new; it was brewed just before the feasts at which it was to be drunk. Comp. Orkney Saga, new ed., ch. 34, vol. i. p. 113, transl. :—“ Earl Rognvald sat in Kirkwall, and drew thither all the stores which he needed to have for his winter quarters. He had, too, there a great band of men and much good cheer. But a little before Yule Earl Rognvald fared with a great following into the Little Papey to fetch malt to be brewed for Yule.”</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-29">Humboldt, for instance, in his Kosmos.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-30">Kari’s ships were thus distinguished when he came to the rescue of Njal’s sons, in Scotland’s Firths.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-31">See our Saga, ch. vi., vol. i., p. 21, where Hrut sets off in the spring to the West Firths, to get in the money for which he had sold the wares which he had brought with him from Norway the summer before.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-32">Maurer Isländische Sagen, Leipzig, 1860, 220-1. The reason given by modern tradition for this choice of a burying place, was, that she might be near the Bishop, a fact which shows how tradi- tions grow, for the Bishop’s residence was not removed to Laugar- ness till a very recent date.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-33">“ At veita nábjargir.”</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-34">See the very curious account of the binding on the “ hell- shoes” in Gísli Súr’s son’s Saga. Kph. 1849, p. 23. “ Gísli,” after his brother-in-law Vestein had been slain in his house, “ makes ready with all his men to lay Vestein in a cairn on that sandhill under which Sedgetarn also lies, below the house at Sæbol. And when Gísli had set out on his way, then Thorgrim” —who had secretly slain Vestein—“ came with many men to the cairn-making. But when they had laid Vestein in the cairn, as was the custom, Thorgrim went up to Gísli and said, ‘ It is right and customary,’ says he, ‘ to bind hellshoon on men, which they shall walk in to Valhalla, and I will do that for Vestein.’ And when he had done that, then he said, ‘ I cannot bind on hell- shoon at all if these loosen.’” So also, in the later version of the Saga (p. 107), “ And when they had made the cairn, Thorgrim the priest goes up to Gísli and said, ‘ Now it is a custom,</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-35">Those who failed to attend were liable to a fine, þingfarar- kaup, which went to the priest. He had also other dues, as temple rate or toll (hoftollr), fines from the goods of outlaws, tolls from foreigu ships, succession dues and fines on the death or manslaugh- ter of strangers who died without heirs in Iceland, and finally (sau- ðakvöð), certain dues in the way of sheep from the freemen of the district. But, on the other hand, the office of the goði, even sup- posing him to have drawn upon all these sources of income at once, was one that required considerable outlay. The temple was kept in repair at his cost, he supplied the victims for sacrifices, and prepared the feast in a worthy manner. This duty, in heathen times, before the Althing was established, and the þingfararkaup became a source of revenue, must have swallowed up most of the temple tolls. When the Althing came, the Thingmen of the goði rode thither and were maintained during their stay there in his booths and at his ex- pense. In this way the fines for non-attendance must have been more than consumed. Well therefore might the old Christian law of Iceland say—&quot; When a man has a priesthood, this is not to be reckoned as liable to tithe. It is power but not property.&quot;</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-36">See the origin of the name in Landnáma, V. 12, ed. 1843. Kettlebjörn the old, while looking about for a lot that suited him, came up from Ellidaros, near Reykjavik, to search the land. The first night he stopped at Skalabrekka. “But when they went thence they came to that stream which they called Axewater (Üxará), there they lost their axe; they stayed sometime under a fell-mull (that is, a bluff jutting out from the fell), which they called Reyðarmull (troutmull or charmull, the fish being so called from its bright red colour), and there they set their hearts upon the trout that they caught in the stream.” If so, Kettlebjörn must have passed over the Thing- field, and passed on towards Reyðarmull and Reyðwater before he fell upon a lot that suited him in Laugardale and the Tongues.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-37">Grágás Greygoose, the venerable code of laws by which Ice- land was governed in the time of the Commonwealth. The origin of the name seems doubtful. It came perhaps from the grey goose skin with which the Book of the Law was covered.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-38">That the bridge was some little way down the stream is plain, from Njála, ch. 144, vol. ii., p. 274, where Hall of the Side, and Ljot, when driven out of the battle, which began near the Hill of Laws, turn down east of Axewater. There Ljot waits at the foot</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-39">Virki “ work,” “ fortified place,” where the word is used in the sense in which it still is often heard in the last syllable of “ earthwork.”</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-40">Hólmgang, pl. hólmgöngur, from “hólm” an island or holm, and “ganga” to go; islands were chosen because the laws of the duello in those days required that neither combatant should step without a given space. For the Code of Honour in Iceland see Kormak’s Saga, ch. x. p. 86-8, where the whole law of duelling is laid down in the most punctilious way. Comp. also Gísli Súr’s son’s Saga, I. p. 6, and Egil’s Saga, chap. lxvii. p. 159, ed. Rey- kjavík, 1856.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-41">The following description of the arrangement of the booths on the Althing was written in the year 1700, and printed in the Ice- landic Periodical Thjódólfr of May 2d, 1851 :— “ Flosi’s booth on the Althing was farthest to the north on the west side under the waterfall, but was nearly all broken down in 1700 ; but where the Court of Laws sat in 1700, was the booth of Thorgeir the Priest of Lightwater, who was the Speaker who brought Christianity into the law. The cleft of the cross, the height of which was that of King Olaf Tryggvi’s son, that cleft is next on the north to</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-42">When Njal, ch. 69, vol. i., p. 222, says, “That is no breach of settlement that any man should take the law against another, for with law shall our land be built up and settled, and with lawless- ness wasted and spoiled,” he no doubt appeals to the good sense of the community, and points out the blessings derived from the substitution of judicial trials instead of wager of battle.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-43">Vættvangsbúar. The “vættvangr,” or legal “spot,” is laid down in Greygoose, II. 19, A. to extend a bowshot every way from the spot where the first assault was made.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-44">In cases of homicide no summoning of the manslayer was needed. He was bound to confess the deed as soon as it was com- mitted, under pain of being held guilty of murder. In civil suits, or in those for petty crimes, as in Unna's suit against Hrut for her portion, or in that for Hallgerda's theft, the plaintiff had to summon the defendant at his own abode, a service often of no small danger.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-45">The Icelandic year was divided into two parts, summer and winter, each consisting of twenty-six weeks; the first summer day was the Thursday which fell between the 9th and 15th of April, old style.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-46">This was called at spyrja at þingfesti ok heimilisfangi.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-47">Ut fara is the term used; it implies that the courts proceeded from the Hill of Laws, or the Court of Laws, as a common centre.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-48">This was called at reifa málit, and the foreman was called reifingarmaðr. There were two of these foremen, one for the</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-49">Maurer, Isl. Staatsverfass. p. 186, agrees with the Glossary to the 4to edition of Grágás, in thinking that the word comes from the negative prefix &quot; ve&quot; and &quot; fang,&quot; business, as though nothing further could be done in the suit. Cleasby's Dict., sub voce, on the other hand, derives it from &quot; vè,&quot; halidom, and &quot; fang&quot; from &quot; fengja,&quot; to lay hold, as though the judges, on dividing, laid hold of the hallowed ring, and made oath as to the step which they were about to take.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-50">It is curious to remark how the old right of battle underlies the whole system of the Law in heathen times. It seems to have</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-51">This was called &quot; at handselia sök,&quot; or &quot; at handselia vörn ;&quot; sometimes, as in Njála, p. 217, orig., or vol. ii. p. 210, transl., the expression &quot; selia á hendr&quot; is used.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-52">Þings afglöpun. In this way Eyjolf and Flosi are both sum- moned to the Fifth Court in our Saga, vol. ii. ch. 143, p. 261, first for bribery, and secondly for having brought false and irrelevant witness before the Court. The irrelevancy and chicanery consisted in the following points. In the first place, Flosi had no right to change his Quarter without leave had from the Court of Laws; secondly, public notice ought to have been given of the change of priesthood ; and thirdly, the competency of the Court depended on the state of things at the time when the suit was set on foot, and therefore a change of priesthood at a later date was irrelevant, so far as that suit was concerned.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-53">Fjörbaug, literally “lifering,” or fine; fjörbaugsmaðr, a man who had satisfied the law by paying such a fine to the priest; fjorbaugsgarðr, an enclosed space near a court, a “verge” or “liberty” with in which a “fjörbaugsmaðr” was safe; which word, as it seems from several passages in Grágás and the Sagas, is also used for the lesser outlawry itself.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-54">The sole right of exemption from this public burden allowed by the law, was the plea that the shipmaster had already undertaken to give other outlaws a passage.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-55">In other words, Sam only made Hrafnkell “héraðssekr,” instead of taking his life as a “skógmaðr.”</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-56">“ Hafði hann þat í hug sèr at leiða smánönnum at sækja mál á hendr hánum ; ætlaði hann at hleypa upp dóminum fyrir Sámi ok hrekja hann af málinu.” Hrafnkel’s Saga Freysgoða</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-57">“At veita grið ok trygðir;” the formulary itself was called “griðamál” or “trygðamál,” and he who uttered it was said “at mæla fyrir griðum.”</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-58">Heiðarvíga Saga (Ísland. Sög. ii.), p. 379 foll.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-59">In this sketch of an Icelandic trial, and for the law in general, Arnesens Islandske Rættergang, Kbh. 1762, has been fol- lowed. But as much has been made clearer since Arnesens' day, his statements have been corrected and checked by Maurer's invaluable treatise, Die Entstehung des Isländischen Staats und seiner Verfassung, München, 1852. Over the history of the Fim- tardóm or Fifth Court, in particular, Maurer's genius and research have thrown an entirely new light. The only point which he seems not to have proved is the existence of the Lögmaðr as a regular official in each priesthood, and bearing in some respects a co-ordinate authority with the priests themselves. So far as Ice- land is concerned, the existence of such an official rests upon two passages, one in Hávarðar Saga Ísfirðings, ch. 1, p. 2. Kph. 1860. Comp. ch. 3, p. 8; the other in Svarfdæla Saga, ch. 10; in both of which it seems doubtful whether the term lögmaðr is not used rather of a man like Njál or Mord, skilled and learned in the law, to whom the neighbours betook themselves for advice, than tech- nically of one filling a fixed and recognized office. It may be</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-60">The following pretty story, translated by the writer, and published in the first number of “ Once a Week,” shows plainly the</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-61">The answer of Thorstein, Hall of the Side’s son, when Ker- thialfad asked him why he did not fly like the rest, but stopped to tie his shoe, was worthy of the best days of Sparta. “ Because I am at home in Iceland, and I cannot get home to-night.” food both for his bear and himself. So he went to a bailiff of the king, whose name was Auki, and begged him to get him some food, that he might feed himself and the bear, which he meant to give to King Sweyn. “ Auki answers : ‘ I will sell thee food, if thou wilt.’ “ ‘ I have nothing to give for it now,’ said Audun ; ‘ but I would be glad to hit upon some way of bringing the beast to the king, for it were great scathe if so precious a thing were to die on my hands.’ “ Auki said : ‘ Ye’ll both of you need much food before ye get to the king. And now I’ll make thee this offer : I will feed ye both till then, but then I must have half the beast; and what thou hast now to look at is this—that thou wilt not have even half of it if it starves to death on thy hands.’ “ Audun thought this choice hard, but still could see nothing better for it as things stood ; so they struck a bargain, and he agreed to sell Auki half the bear, on condition that they started for where the king was at once, and should reckon the worth on both sides, first of the food which Auki gave him, and then of the beast; and that Auki should pay Audun so much as was over, if the king thought half the bear worth more than the food. So they went both of them till they found King Sweyn. He greeted Auki, the bailiff, well, but asked the man who came with him who he was, for he did not know “ Audun answers : ‘ I am a man from Iceland, new come from</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-62">Trotternish and Vaternish in Skye, for instance.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-63">It is plain that Brodir’s real name is lost. He was Ospak’s brother, and the Irish Annalists made the noun of relationship into a proper name. Comp. Maurer, Bekehrung des Norwegisch-</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-64">See the Story in the Orkney Saga, new edition, ch. 11, vol. i. p. 29. The Scottish Earl Finnleik had challenged Earl Sigurd to meet him in a pitched battle by a certain day. Earl Sigurd went to seek counsel of his mother, who was a wise woman, and told her the odds against him would not be less than seven to one. “His mother said, ‘I had reared thee up long in my wool-bag had I known that thou wouldst like to live for ever, but know that fate rules life, and not the place whither a man goeth ; better is it to die with honour than to live with shame. Take thou here hold of this banner, which I have made with all my art, and I ween it will bring victory to those before whom it is borne, but speedy death to him</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-65">The good King Brian, afterwards known as Brian Boroimhe, or &quot;of the Tribute,&quot; succeeded his brother Mahon as King of Munster in 976. After his accession he waged constant wars with the Northmen who, in the two preceding centuries, had overrun and settled in many parts of Ireland, their chief strongholds being the seaports of Dublin, Wexford, Waterford, Limerick, and Cork. Being able to hold his own against these formidable foes, whom, as the Irish Annals say, he defeated in more than forty battles, Brian reduced the petty kings and chiefs of his own race, forcing them to pay tribute, and to give him hostages. At length, in 1002, being then himself seventy-six, he deposed the Overking of Ireland, Malachi the Second, of the race of Hy-Niall, a dynasty which had held that dignity really or nominally for 600 years, since the days of their great ancestor, Njal of the Nine Hostages, so called because in the course of his conquests he had taken hostages from nine nations. He is said to have made St. Patrick prisoner in Gaul when a lad, and to have sold him as a slave in Ireland, whence he escaped to return as the Apostle of Ireland. This Njal is interesting to us, as the first Njal of whom tradition tells; the name was a common Irish one, and still exists in Neal, Neill, and the other forms of the word. Our Njal got it from some unknown connexion of his family with Ireland, just as Kormak and Kjartan, and many other Ice- landers with Celtic names, got theirs. But to return to Brian,—hav- ing thus assumed the sovereignty of Ireland as Lord Paramount, Brian lived in great state and glory in his palace at Ceann Corradh, or Kincora, near Killaloe, in the county of Clare. The tribute from which he derived his title Boroimhe—unless he was so called, as</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-66">Munch, II. 646, supposes that this name is a distortion of the Celtic Tirdelvach ; and he further supposes that this was the Chris- tian name of the O'Kelly, king of Hy Maine, mentioned in the Annals of Innisfail as having been one of the leaders on Brian’s side.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-67">Munch, N. H. ii. 645, thinks that it was one of Brian’s dis- contented vassals who thus gave secret information to the foe, but the account given above is better suited to the mythical hue which is thrown over the battle in our Saga. The hour and the day, too, Thursday evening, the most witching time, according to northern belief, in all the week, speak for the supernatural character of the stranger.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-11-68">In Icelandic, “Vef Darraðar”—the name of Daurrud, the man in Caithness who is said to have seen the weaving—clearly arose out of a misunderstanding as to the meaning of the old word “Darraðr,” which implies “war,” or “the goddess of war.” See Sveinbjörn Egilsson sub voce.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
