<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Religion of the Race</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="appendix-7" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Religion of the Race</h2>
			<p>We have seen that the first comers to Iceland had been Christian anchorites. But it was not as anchorites and priests that the new settlers came. Priests indeed there were amongst them, but not Christian priests. Every father of a family was a priest in his own house, and every father of a family was a king in his own house. That was their notion of the priesthood, and that was their notion of the kingly power. They had in fact hardly passed beyond the limits of the patriarchal state. As patriarchs, then, the new settlers came, each head of a house with his kith and kin, with his sons and his daughters, with his freedmen and thralls, with his oxen and fatlings. As a priest, too, he came, to whom it belonged to fulfil the simple rites of his faith ; he brought the holy pillars of his high-seat, the props of his tribunal, and the ornament of his drinking-hall, and sometimes he even brought with him a portion of the sacred soil itself, a foot or two of Norway earth, on which to pitch those holy pillars, or to rear a new shrine in a strange land in honour of the ancient gods. A few words must suffice to sketch the most striking features of his faith. It is idle to attempt to trace, in the creed which revered Odin and the Æsir as Gods, any echo of the Hebrew doctrine of the One True God. Neither time nor place allowed that Semitic verity to resound so far. The North man’s creed was homemade, and it was made thus. First, in the gray dawn of time, came a worship of the elements. When man is weak and nature rude, he bows before the natural powers which he has not yet learnt to tame. Thus, he adores the wind that whelms his frail bark beneath the waves, the blustering storm, the driving snow, the bristling ice, the boisterous sea. He personifies them as Giants, malevolent to man. But as man grows strong, nature grows weak. He builds him houses and defies the storm, in better clothing he braves the bitter snow and frost, in better boats he sails in safety over the treacherous sea. Nature bows and bends before him, from her thrall he becomes her master⁠—the reign of the bad powers is over. But man must have a God; and now that he has put nature under his feet, he worships himself. Thus, a new race of divinities arise, the dis posers and arrangers, and subduers of nature; he tills the fields, and, as seed time and harvest succeed, he worships the God that sends the golden grain ; he tracks and fells the monarch of the wood, and he worships the hunter’s God ; and so on, with ships and skates, with tools and arms ; for every step which he makes in social progress he fills a new niche in the Pantheon of his faith, till at last he rises to feelings and emotions, and adores his own passions as the Gods of War and Love and Song. The divinities of such a faith, like the Spectre of the Brocken, are simply the shadows of man himself, mimicking his gestures and actions, and looming huge and mighty on the misty veil which hides the Holy of Holies from his sight. But in all religions one must rule. There are no republics, though there may be tyrannies, in matters of faith. Here, again, the North man’s choice of the Supreme God was a true reflection of himself. On emerging from nature-worship in the savage state, he passed into the patriarch, he became the father of a family, and his gods were patriarchal gods. Odin, the Great Father, was the sire of gods and men. The Æsir, the lesser gods, were his children, either by birth or choice, and they revered and obeyed him as the head of their house, whose might and wisdom far exceeded theirs. As time rolled on, the Great Father takes another name. He is now not the Father of All, but the Father of the Slain. He has become the God of Battles ; and this change marks the time when the North man, straitened at home by the natural increase of population, and attacked from abroad by other tribes, rushes forth, conquering and to conquer, and lays new lands under his feet.</p>
			<p>A few more strokes will complete the sketch. As Fate was above Zeus himself, so Fate was stronger than Odin and the Æsir. A gloomy Fate. Over this faith hung a cloud of melancholy which no brilliant feats of arms could brighten. It was foredoomed, and felt that it was foredoomed, to pass away. It was as it were a cornfield won from the wilderness. Around it still lowered the wild natural powers, expelled but not extinct. Nay, the day and the hour were ever drawing nigh when the God of Battles would have to fight for his own, and would fall, with almost every member of his family.</p>
			<p>At the period of which we write, the dreaded “Twilight of the Gods,” the awful day of doom, was impending. Balder, the bright and good, had passed from the happy family circle of the Æsir to the cold abodes of Hell and death, and the North man felt, as many have felt when the heavy hand of death has been busy in their house, as though the sun of his religion were fast sinking behind a bank of cloud, and that these things were but the warning of worse woes and still deeper gloom. Still the North man went cheerily and heartily to his work. It was hard, but Thor would have harder work when Midgard’s Worm came. He might lose a limb. Well! Týr lost a limb when the Wolf bit off his hand; but it was his duty. He might die. Why, Odin was himself to die at last. Let him die, then, but die bravely, and haste to Valhalla as one of Odin’s chosen champions, and there be ready to stand by him as his faithful servant and soldier at the great day of doom. Above all things, too, we must bear in mind that this faith was suited to the race that believed it. They had made it for themselves⁠—it was their own handiwork. By slow degrees, little by little, and step by step, it had sprung up among them. Every man of them believed it, for it was part of themselves, flesh of their flesh, bone of their bone, and soul of their soul ; and until their stony hearts were changed, and melted before the warm breath of a livelier and a better faith, they clung to it, and died for it, for it was but the transfiguration of the natural man, with all his virtues and vices, all his feelings and passions and natural affections. Nor was it any cringing creed. The North man was justified rather by works than faith. If he did his duty</p>
			<p>Valhalla was his rightful meed. He looked upon the lesser Gods, even in the height of his belief, as above him in power indeed, but as only his equals in right. They were bound to protect him if he sacrificed to them and honoured them, but if he thought himself unfairly treated, even by his Gods, he openly took them to task and forsook their worship.<a href="#note-religion-1" id="noteref-religion-1" epub:type="noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> Numerous instances of this feeling occur in the Sagas, and, as the reverence for the old faith declined, it naturally became stronger and stronger.</p>
			<h2>Superstitions of the Race</h2>
			<p>Besides his creed the North man had many superstitions. He believed in good giants<a href="#note-religion-2" id="noteref-religion-2" epub:type="noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> and bad giants, in dark elves and bright elves, in superhuman beings who filled the wide gulf which existed between himself and the gods. He believed, too, in wraiths and fetches and guardian spirits,<a href="#note-religion-3" id="noteref-religion-3" epub:type="noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> who followed particular persons, and belonged to certain families⁠—a belief which seems to have sprung from the habit of regarding body and soul as two distinct beings, which at certain times took each a separate bodily shape. Sometimes the guardian spirit or fylgja took a human shape, at others its form took that of some animal fancied to foreshadow the character of the man to whom it belonged. Thus it becomes a bear, a wolf, an ox, and even a fox, in men. The fylgjur of women were fond of taking the shape of swans. To see one’s own fylgja was unlucky, and often a sign that a man was “fey,” or death-doomed. So, when Thord Freedmanson tells Njal that he sees the goat wallowing in its gore in the “town” of Bergthorsknoll, the foresighted man tells him that he has seen his own fylgja, and that he must be doomed to die. Finer and nobler natures often saw the guardian spirits of others. Thus Njal saw the fylgjur of Gunnar’s enemies, which gave him no rest the livelong night, and his weird feeling is soon confirmed by the news brought by his shepherd. From the fylgia of the individual it was easy to rise to the still more abstract notion of the guardian spirits of a family, who sometimes, if a great change in the house is about to begin, even show themselves as hurtful to some member of the house.<a href="#note-religion-4" id="noteref-religion-4" epub:type="noteref"><sup>4</sup></a> He believed also that some men had more than one shape (voru eigi einhamir) ; that they could either take the shapes of animals, as bears or wolves, and so work mischief ; or that, without undergoing bodily change, an access of rage and strength came over them, and more especially towards night, which made them more than a match for ordinary men. Such men were called hamrammir, “ shape strong,” and it was remarked that when the fit left them they were weaker than they had been before.<a href="#note-religion-5" id="noteref-religion-5" epub:type="noteref"><sup>5</sup></a></p>
			<p>This gift was looked upon as something “uncanny,” and it leads us at once to another class of men, whose supernatural strength was regarded as a curse to the community. These were the Bares arks.<a href="#note-religion-6" id="noteref-religion-6" epub:type="noteref"><sup>6</sup></a> What the hamrammir men were when they were in their fits the Bares arks almost always were. They are described as being always of exceeding, and when their fury rose high, of superhuman strength. They too, like the hamrammir men, were very tired when the fits passed off. What led to their fits is hard to say. In the case of the only class of men like them now-a-days, that of the Malays running a-muck, the intoxicating fumes of bangh or arrack are said to be the cause of their fury. One thing, however, is certain, that the Baresark, like his Malay brother, was looked upon as a public pest, and the mischief which they caused, relying partly no doubt on their natural strength, and partly on the hold many fathers of families who indulge in a nap after dinner would pass for werewolves or worse.</p>
			<p>which the belief in their supernatural nature had on the mind of the people, was such as to render their killing a good work. Again, the North man believed that certain men were “fast” or “hard;” that no weapons would touch them or wound their skin ; that the mere glance of some men’s eyes would turn the edge of the best sword ; and that some persons had the power of withstanding poison. He believed in omens and dreams and warnings, in signs and wonders and tokens ; he believed in good luck and bad luck, and that the man on whom fortune smiled or frowned bore the marks of her favour or displeasure on his face ; he believed also in magic and sorcery, though he loathed them as unholy rites. With one of his beliefs our story has much to do, though this was a belief in good rather than in evil. He believed firmly that some men had the inborn gift, not won by any black arts, of seeing things and events beforehand. He believed, in short, in what is called in Scotland “second sight.” This was what was called being “forspár”<a href="#note-religion-7" id="noteref-religion-7" epub:type="noteref"><sup>7</sup></a> or “framsýnn,” “foretelling” and “foresighted.”</p>
			<hr/>
			<section id="religion-endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
				<h2 epub:type="title">Notes</h2>
				<p id="note-religion-1"><a href="#noteref-religion-1">1</a> One quotation must suffice for all :⁠—” Hrafnkell,” who had been a great worshipper of Frey, ” heard that the sons of Thjostar,” who had turned him out of house and land, ” had killed Freyfax,” a horse whom he had hallowed to Frey, ” and burnt the temple. Then Hrafnkell answers and says, ‘ I think it folly to believe in the Gods,’ and says, he will never thenceforth believe in them ; and he kept his word, for from that day forward he offered no sacrifices.”⁠—Hrafnkell Freysgoða Saga, p. 24. Kjobenh. 1847.</p>
				<p id="note-religion-2"><a href="#noteref-religion-2">2</a> Such, for instance, as Barðr Snæfells Ás. Comp. Maurer. Die Bekehrung des Norwegischen Stammes, II. 60, foll.</p>
				<p id="note-religion-3"><a href="#noteref-religion-3">3</a> Hamingjur or fylgjur.</p>
				<p id="note-religion-4"><a href="#noteref-religion-4">4</a> See the curious account of the death of Thidrandi, Hall of the Side’s son, whom our Saga simply says that ” the goddesses, Dísir, slew.” The whole story is contained in the younger Saga of Olaf Tryggvi’s son, ch. 215, pp. 192⁠–⁠6. We learn from it, that Thidrandi having been warned by a foresighted man not to stir out of his father’s house one night, if any one knocked at the door, still sprang up when the knock came and went out, thinking it might be some one in want of shelter. When he got into the yard, he saw on one side nine women in black raiment, riding from the north on nine horses, and holding drawn swords in their hands ; against them from the south came nine other women in white raiment on white horses. Then Thidrandi tried to get back into the house to tell his story, but the nine women in black raiment got between him and the door, and fell on him with their swords, while he kept them off as well as he could. Just then the wise man who had warned him sprang up from his sleep, and, going out to look for Thidrandi, found him lying on the ground sorely wounded. They brought him, and he told his strange story, but died at early dawn. Of his enemies no trace could be found. When Hall asked the wise man what all this meant, he answered, ” I know uot, but I can guess that these were no other women than the guardian spirits of thy race (fylgjur yðra frænda) ; and I suspect that a change of faith is about to happen, and that these your goddesses (dísir) must have seen what is coming to pass, and that they are angry at it, lest they should not have the respect paid to them to which they have been wont.”</p>
				<p id="note-religion-5"><a href="#noteref-religion-5">5</a> For the actual change</p>
				<p id="note-religion-6"><a href="#noteref-religion-6">6</a> The derivation from bare sark, as though they went into battle bare of armour, in their shirts, without being wounded, has lately been attacked, amongst others, by Sveinbjörn Egilsson, in his Poetical Dict. sub voce. He wishes to derive the first syllable from a form of the word “bear,” and would make it spring from the change of shape into bears, which these hamrammir men were sup-posed to be able to take.</p>
				<p id="note-religion-7"><a href="#noteref-religion-7">7</a> The Icelanders carefully observed the distinction between this sort of foreknowledge and ordinary worldly wisdom. We have one of the best instances of this in our Saga itself, where we are told, ch. 113, vol. ii., pp. 117, that “Snorri was the wisest and shrewdest of all those men in Iceland who had not the gift of foresight;” a</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
