<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Money and Currency in the Tenth Century</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section epub:type="appendix">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Money and Currency in the Tenth Century</h2>
			</header>
			<p>The question of money and currency in Iceland, in the tenth century, is one of great difficulty, that difficulty being much increased by the fact that the sumsand proportions mentioned in the Sagas and Laws relateto a period at which the currency and the standards of the tenth century had undergone great changes. In aword, the writers apply the currency and standards of their own age to one which in those respects was widelydifferent. The following are the results of much inquiryinto the matter. In early times there were two standards of value—measure, and weight, and two materials,</p>
			<p>two essays by Petersen in the Annaler for Nordisk Oldkyndighed, who thinks it probable that she died in Jutland, and that thebody found was possibly hers. See on the other hand, Worsaae, Hist. Tidskrift, iii. p. 244-292. On the whole it was a verypretty quarrel. It is remarkable, however, that in the speechput into King Olaf Tryggvi's son's mouth in the Flatey book, whenconverting Earl Sigurd, he only speaks of “ most of Gunnhillda'ssons having been cut off (afráðnir) though Ragnhilda was stillalive.” Now, it would seem probable that the zealous king, had thewoman who slew his father met with such a just retribution, would scarcely have failed to make a point of her fate in his “ long and able speech,” by mentioning her along with her sons, and so alluding to the manner of her death.</p>
			<p>to which those standards were adjusted—wadmal* orwoollen cloth for measure, and silver for weight. 1. In the standard of woollen or measure, the unitywas the ell, and its multiples up to a hundred. Thishundred being the long hundred of twelve tens, or 120.† This standard, which was called that of measure or tale, was the currency of the island in old times, and stillexists in Iceland as the national currency (landaurar, talið) at the present day. All landed property, and goodsand chattels are valued in it ; and when it is said thatsuch and such a bit of land, or such a herd of cattle, orso much furniture are worth 20, 60, or 80 hundreds, themeaning of the words, and the value of the property, is aswell understood as both would have been in Njal’s time. 2. In the standard of weight or silver, the unity wasthe ounce, or eyrir (pl. aurar), eight of which made the</p>
			<p>mark (mörk) or pound. But as time went on, these twostandards were confounded together, and though ells andhundreds belonged originally strictly to the woollenstandard, or that of measure alone, and ounces (aurar), and marks (mörk) to that of weight alone, men began tospeak of hundreds of weighed silver, and of measured orreckoned ounces and marks of woollen. So that, thoughit was etymologically right only to talk of weighedmarks, and measured or reckoned hundreds, andetymologically wrong to talk of weighed hundredsand measured or reckoned marks, still custom and convenience soon broke through etymological rules, andthus we find ounces and marks used to express thecountry currency by measure and tale, and ellsand hundreds weighed to express the silver standard. This confusion between ounces and marks bytale, and ells and hundreds by weight, was worse confounded by the introduction, at a very early time, offoreign minted silver or coin, which of course would bereckoned by tale. In the tenth century there seems tohave been but one such coin, the penning, or Anglo- Saxon penny, of which vast numbers found their way to the north by trade and war.* It is improbable that there</p>
			<p>were such coins at the period of which we write as marksor ounces, but that, when those sums are mentioned, they were weighed or made up by tale from the coinswhich we have mentioned. But in those days silver bytale and silver by weight were one and the same thing. Having thus explained the two standards of weightand tale, and shown how they became confounded interms, while remaining distinct in fact, we proceed toinquire, what proportion the woollen currency by talebore to the silver currency by weight. How did thehundred ells by tale stand with regard to the hundredin silver by weight. This naturally varied at differenttimes, but about the year 1000 the proportion was asfour to one. According to Grágás four hundreds inwoollen, and twenty yards as margin, were thenequal to one hundred in silver, and the passage is soremarkable, that it is worth quotation at length. It is</p>
			<p>of Hacon Athelstane’s foster-child, who died 960 ; in fact, it is aquestion whether there were any coins struck in his reign at all, for one which has been found bearing the name “ Hacon ” maybe ascribed to Earl Hacon. In any case, according to Munch, thenumber of Norwegian coins in circulation, if any existed at all, must have been very few, while the quantity of Anglo-Saxoncoins found all over the north shews that they must have passedcurrent everywhere. In later times the “ örtug,” a Norwegiancoin, is spoken of as well as the “ penning :” the eyrir or ouncecontained three örtugs.</p>
			<p>there said, sect. 245, ed. Kbh. 1856, “At that time, when Christianity came out hither to Iceland, silver wascurrent in all great dealings. It was to be pale silver, and must stand cutting, and be most part silver, and ifit were coined, so coined that sixty* pennies made an</p>
			<p>ounce weighed, and then silver by tale and silver byweight was all one. A hundred in silver was thententh part of an eyrir.” Again—“Lögsilfr et forna þat er xpenningar göra eyri.”—Grág. II. 188, 4to. “The old law-silver, of which ten pennies make an ounce.” But here again a puzzlingqualification is added—“Oc meir se silfrslit á en messingar, oc þoli scor, oc se jamt utan sem innan.” “And which has morethe hue of silver than of latten, and which will bear cutting, andis alike outside and inside.” In all such qualifying expressionsin MS. of the thirteenth century, as to the purity of silver, onecannot help thinking that the scribe, when speaking of the oldstandard silver, applies to it the legal stipulations required for the “lög-silfr” or “law-silver” of his own, and that a muchlater, day. This “bleikt silfr,” or “gangsilfr,” or “lögsilfr,” this “pale,” or “current,” or “lawful silver,” in which the silverjust turned the scale over the alloy, which was more of a silvernthan a brazen hue, and which was even in colour and fibrethroughout, was the legal silver currency of the thirteenth century, and may be reckoned as worth 2s. 6d. an ounce. Opposed toit, as superior in purity, was “skírt silfr,” or “brendt silfr,” “puresilver” or “burnt silver ;” and as inferior in purity, grásilfr orblásilfr, “gray” or “blue silver.” We know from Grágás (II. 193, 8vo), that early in the thirteenth century a mark of this pureor burnt silver was worth an ounce of gold “that would stand the fire,” and these were each worth sixty ounces of law silver ; in other words, the proportion between pure silver and law silverwas then almost eight to one, and the proportion between pureor burnt silver and gold was exactly as eight to one, since therewere eight ounces or eyrir in every pound or mark. As for “gray silver” or “blue silver,” we are told by a MS. in the Arna-Magnæan Library at Copenhagen, 732, p. 16, that it was “thirty times less valuable than gold.” All these facts point to</p>
			<p>reckoned the same as four hundreds and twenty* ells ofwadmal, and then the ounce (of silver) was worth half amark of wadmal.”</p>
			<p>It now remains to inquire into the value of thesestandards respectively in English money.† It appears,</p>
			<p>a rapid depreciation of the silver standard, attended, as we shallsee, by a proportionate rise in the woollen currency. The ounceof silver, which, at the calculation of 4s. 6d. to the eyrir, wouldhave been worth twenty-five ells in the tenth century, wasonly worth six in the thirteenth. Thus Grágás II. 192, 8vo. —“Þat er fiarlag at Althings male at vi alnir vaðmáls gilldznytz oc onotit scolo vera í eyre.” “This is the scale of goods by the custom (or decree) of the Althing, that six ells of good newand unworn wadmal shall be worth an eyrir.” Later still, thereappears to have been further depreciation, if we may judge from the expressions “þriggja alna eyrir,” which seems to mean an ounce in which the silver was only worth three ells. But these questions of the different proportions of the wadmal currency in thethirteenth century are of immense difficulty, and we gladly leavethem to return to an earlier age.</p>
			<p>from the most reliable inquiries, that the value of the Norwegian eyrir or ounce which was the unit of thesilver standard was 4s. 6d., from which it follows that the penny, of which there were to be twenty in anounce weighed, would be worth nearly twopence threefarthings sterling. As there were eight ounces in amark, the worth of that weight of silver would bethirty-six shillings. As the mark of wadmal was equalto a fourth part of the silver mark, its value would benine shillings. With respect to the value of one hundred in silver, or four hundred and twenty ells in wadmal, the most reliable researches have shewn it to beequal to twenty ounces or aurar, or two marks and ahalf, and consequently its value in English moneywould be £4 : 10s. for the silver hundred.</p>
			<p>These would be the values of the eyrir or ounce, mark, and hundred, supposing the purity of the silverto have been equal to that of our standard silver ; and there is every reason to believe that this was the case</p>
			<p>The Anglo-Saxon ounce, which was no doubt the same as theold Tower ounce, weighed 450 grains Troy, and the old Cologneor German ounce weighed 451·38 grains Troy. This old Norwegian ounce of 412·58 grains Troy, as compared with the present Troy ounce of 480 grains, shews the value of the silver in the former to have been very nearly 4s. 6d., assuming the presentprice of standard silver to be 5s. 2d. an ounce.</p>
			<p>in the tenth century. In the first place, we are actuallyin a position to test the purity of the silver then current in the North. It was almost all English, and the researches of Ruding and others have proved that the Anglo-Saxon coins—however deficient some of themmay have been in weight, partly from design and partlyfrom the rude appliances of the Anglo-Saxon Mint—arein fact of the same purity as our sterling silver, andthat our standard is in fact the Anglo-Saxon standard. In the next place, we know that Anglo-Saxon coins werecarried to Iceland in large quantities. The penny which Grim Goatshoe got from every household for surveyingthe island, before the Althing was established in theyear 929, was no doubt an English penny ; the moneywhich Egil brought back to Iceland after the Battleof Brunanburg was Anglo-Saxon money; and so, too, there is little doubt that the penny, or scatt-penny, which Eyvind Scaldspoiler got, in the reign of Harold Grayfell, from every household in Iceland for hispoem in praise of Icelanders, and which we are expressly told was equal to three weighed pennies of alater age, was an Anglo-Saxon penny.* For these</p>
			<p>reasons, both because we know the exact weight ofsilver in the old Norwegian ounce, and because weknow that the silver of which it was ordinarily composed was pure, we are inclined to think that the valuesgiven above will be found to be correct. It is, however, very evident that the “pale (bleikt) silver” mentioned in the extract from Grágás, “which would bear cuttingand be most part silver,” was considerably alloyed, and ifthe writer is actually describing the silver current in theyear 1000, and not rather the gangsilfr or lögsilfr of hisown day, then the silver of the tenth century must havebeen worth far less in English money. As it was to be “most part silver,” we may assume that the ounce ofthis “pale” silver, or law-silver, would be 2s. 6d., inwhich case the mark would have been worth only 20 shillings sterling, the mark of wadmal only 5 shillings, and the hundred in silver or four hundred andtwenty ells in wadmal £2 : 10s.</p>
			<p>In a tabular form the relative proportions of thetwo hundreds, as well as their values respectively in English money at 4s. 6d. and 2s. 6d. an ounce, wouldstand as follows:</p>
			<p>was written down, and that the old Anglo-Saxon penny was thenworth three later pennies of the same weight, but each containingonly a third of the pure silver in the old coin.</p>
			<p>| 100 (120) in Silver. | 100, 120+5† in Wadmal. | Mark Silver. | Mark Wadmal. | | | 125 ells = 22s. 6d. | oz., eyrir, silver. | oz., wadmal. | | | 5 ells = 10¾d. | 4s. 6d. | 1s. 1½d. |</p>
			<p>| 100 (120) in Silver. | 100 120 + 5 in Wadmal. | Mark Silver. | Mark Wadmal. | | £2 : 10s. | 12s. 6d. | 20s. | 5s. | | | 125 ells = 12s. 6d. | oz., eyrir, silver. | oz., wadmal. | | | 5 ells = 6d. | 2s. 6d. | 7½d. |</p>
			<p>With regard to the relative value of these suns in the tenth century, it may occur to some readers that the proportion of four to one between the silver standardand the wadmal currency is too low, especially if wesuppose that the silver of the tenth century was equal toour standard silver ; but in making this comparison, itmust be remembered that in the tenth century the precious metals were more abundant and in less demandthan they were in succeeding centuries. There was lesscoining and more barter, less want of money as a circulating medium, and more of it hoarded. Commerce</p>
			<p>and Viking cruizes brought a rich store of silver into the north, which lay idle except when its owner wascalled on to complete a large bargain, or to pay someblood-fine at the bidding of the law. There was thenno difference, as we have seen from Grágás, betweensilver by tale and silver by weight, but a century or twoafter, when Viking voyages had almost ceased, and thesupply of silver into the North was cut off, there was avery great difference between sums paid in coin whichwere clipped and debased, and so depreciated, and payments by weight in pure silver.* In the tenth century, we have seen that the value of the eyrir or silver ounce</p>
			<p>would be twenty-five ells of wadmal, but in later times, as it became debased, it was only worth six, and laterstill, only three ells of the woollen currency. Then arosethat distinction, which we are expressly warned by ourauthorities not to accept as existing in earlier times ; then it was that silver by tale and silver by weightbecame two different things. Then it is that we firsthear of örtugs as well as pennies, and of marks andounces and örtugs by weight, which were six times asvaluable as the same sums by tale. It is very doubtfulwhether these sums by tale are another way of expressing the old proportion between the silver and woollen</p>
			<p>him as though the silver in which they had been paid was notpure ; so he tossed it up with his other hand, and down fell allthe silver on the straw.&quot; Fornm. S. vi. 243. This Haldor wasson of our friend Snorri the priest. He had been King Harold'scompanion in Constantinople ; and he now complained so bitterlythat he could not get his pay without cheating, that, though therest of the king's men were content with the debased coin, Haroldhad to give Haldor twelve ounces of &quot; burnt silver,&quot; with whichhe was content. It may be inferred from this passage, that upto that time the silver current in the north had been pure. Infact, just when the kings in the north began to coin, the sourcewhence they had drawn their supplies of the precious metalswas stopped. England and the west ceased to be the battlefieldof the Northmen, and the value of silver rose rapidly. With therise came the usual arts of a scanty exchequer—clipping anddebasement of the standard, followed as certainly by a corresponding rise in the necessaries of life.</p>
			<p>standards, or whether they represent a further depreciation of the silver currency intercalated as it were betweenthe lögsilfr, which in that case would be equivalent to the weighed currency, and the landaurar or woollenstandard. But this again is a question which does not somuch concern us in the tenth century, and which wemay leave with the earnest wish, that some Icelanderfitted for the task may yet unravel this tangled web.*</p>
			<p>If we apply the data at which we have arrived toour Saga, we shall find that while all the fines, bót, insuits are in the standard of silver, whether by weight orin coin, all other transactions with in the country are in the woollen or national currency. Thus when Mord pays</p>
			<p>Hrut sixty hundreds as her portion, that means thesixty hundreds in wadmal, which would be a great portion as compared with Hrut’s landed property and hisship.* Again, when Flosi bargains with the Easterlingfor his ship, and had over and above 20 hundreds inwares, those were hundreds in wadmal and not in silver. When Flosi gave Eyjolf the gold ring which was worthtwelve hundreds in russet stuff,† equal to 288 ounces in</p>
			<p>silver, that was in the national currency (landaurar), though this russet stuff was reckoned as dearer than theordinary wadmal. According to Grágás (II. 193, 8vo.), 5 ells of it went for the eyrir or ounce when 6 of the ordinary wadmal went for that sum. If the ounce be reckonedat 4s. 6d., the ring would have been worth £64 : 16s. in ourmoney, if at 2s. 6d., £36. With regard to the bót or compensation for manslaughter, there can be no doubt that the oldest way of paying it was by ring-tale (at baugatali), and that those blood-fines were connected in someway with the rings used in religious worship. It seemsto be universally agreed, that in the graduated scale ofthose rings mentioned in Grágás—þrímerkingr* (threethe weights and measures in those islands followed the standardsof the mother country, thus the “ure” or “ore” in Orkney isonly another form of “eyrir.” It too was the 8th part of a mark, and was the fundamental unit of weight and value in Orkney. In Shetland we find the cuttel or cut ell, as the fundamental unit, six of which went to the “ure,” this cut ell being the ell ofwadmal. In fact, the unity in Orkney began one step higher up, while in Shetland the old woollen currency of six ells to the “ure” or “eyrir” was retained.—See Mr. Balfour’s “Oppressionsin Orkney and Zetland.” Edinburgh, 1859. Glossary sub voc. “ure,” “mark,” and “cuttel.”</p>
			<p>marks) = 24 oz., tvítugauri = 20 oz., tvímerkíngr (twomarks) = 16 oz., and tólfeyringr 12 oz., the 2d of 20 oz. or two marks and a half in silver, was equivalent toa hundred in silver. The rate of these compensationsvaried in different times, but in the tenth century, twelveounces in silver, or a silver ring of that weight, wasreckoned the fitting compensation for the loss of a thrall, and accordingly, we find that price paid more than oncefor thralls in our Saga. At the same period, one hundred in silver was the price of a freeman who had nofixed abode of his own, and lived at service in anotherfreeman’s house. Thus, we find this sum paid in our Saga for Atli, whose bargain, on remaining in Njal’sservice had been, that if slain he should not be paid foras a thrall. A like amount was paid for Brynjolf theunruly, and in both instances it is added that thatprice was the blood-fine for a freeman. So also in thecase of Thord Freedman’s son, Njal tells his sons thathe had been paid for at the rate of two men, the pricehaving been two hundreds in silver. But, at the sameperiod, there can be no doubt, that the common pricefor a freeman who had a house and land of his own wastwo hundreds in silver, and in the case of Thorwald, of Lightwater a fee of three marks to utter the law. And finally, Mord Valgard’s son made himself liable to a fine of three marks, for wrongly summoning the neighbours on the inquest.</p>
			<p>Halgerda’s first husband, we are expressly told that twohundreds in silver were reckoned “ a good price fora man.” This price was paid by Hauskuld for theslaying of Thorwald, as well as in several other cases inour Saga. When the man slain was of great rankor worth, a higher price was put on him. Thus Hauskuld, Thrain’s son, was to have three times theordinary price, or six hundreds in silver, put uponhim, and when all the body of freemen at the Althingcontributed to pay an atonement for Ljot, Hall of the Side’s son, the sum collected amounted to no less than 8 hundreds in silver, or four times the common price. With regard to Njal, though the Saga says that he waspaid for with a threefold price, this in all probabilitymeans that his blood-fine was three hundreds. Perhapsthe amount of money to be collected in all, when somany other blood-fines had to be paid at the same time, may have helped to lower his price.* But in all thesesums we think we see a fresh proof that the hundred</p>
			<p>in Njal's time was £4 : 10s., rather than £2 : 10s. A man of Njal's worth was surely worth £13 : 10s., and £7 : 10s. would have been too little for him.* We mayfairly conclude, that when there was so much money in the island, and when, in every other relation of life, the freeman was valued so highly, the price paid to hisfamily for his loss would have been on the higher ratherthan on the lower scale.</p>
			<p>In conclusion, we may briefly mention the darkestside of this whole inquiry. We have made out the proportion between the silver and the woollen standards, and shown that they stood in the relation of four to onein the tenth century ; but unless we can ascerta in theproportion in which the woollen standard stood to thenecessaries of life at the same date, we shall be unableto fix the true value of the silver standard. Absolutely and intrinsically the silver oz. was worth 4s. 6d., and relatively to the wadmal currency of the tenth century it was worth four times as much as the woollen oz., in which all the dealings of daily life were transacted. But relatively to the nineteenth century, or in other</p>
			<p>words, the amount of goods which could be bought in Iceland for 4s. 6d. in the tenth century, compared withwhat could be bought there for 4s. 6d. now, would dependentirely on the amount which could be bought then by theounce of wadmal ;—whatever that might be, four timesthat amount could be had for the silver ounce. On thispoint, however, our authorities afford us little information, and we can only conjecture, that the oz. of wadmalin those days was worth about four or five times as muchas it is now. A cow in Iceland at the present day isworth one hundred in wadmal, or £1 : 2 : 6, and sixwethers may be bought for the same sum. In earliertimes, no doubt, four or five cows might have beenbought for the same sum, and we shall probably not bewrong if we conclude, that the value of money in Iceland in the tenth century, as compared with what it isnow, would be about 8 or 9 to 1, and that the threefoldblood-fine which was paid for Njal would have beenabout equal to £100* at the present day. A sum certainly not too great for one of the wisest and mostvirtuous men which that island has ever reared.</p>
			<section epub:type="endnotes">
				<hr/>
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">Notes</h3>
				</header>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-1">Icel. vaðmál. The word is still alive in Orkney and Shet- land ; see Jamieson’s Dict. sub voc. “ vadmell” and “ wadmaal.” It was also known, according to Grose, in some parts of England as “ woadmel.”</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-2">Wherever the figure C for hundred occurs in the Sagas, this invariably means the long hundred of twelve tens (tólfrætt) ; tíu tíu is ased to express ten tens. Guðbrandr Vigfússon thinks that the old Icelandic ell was only half the length of the English ell of three feet, and he draws this inference from the fact, that English yard-wide cloths and stuffs are called two ells (tvíelnt). This, per- haps, is scarcely sufficient evidence as to the old ell ; but if it be cor- rect, Skarphedinn’s leap across Markfleet shrinks from 24 to 18 feet.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-3">According to Munch N. H. I. 799, it is doubtful whether there was any coin struck in Norway before the end of the reign</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-4">This is probably an error for twenty. The editor of the new edition of Grágás remarks, in a note, that the scribe seems to have written two x’s, which were afterwards altered to lx, The ounce in early times would have been coined into twenty Anglo-Saxon pennies ; but when the standard was debased, as it was when this MS. of Grágás was written, it would have been coined into sixty pence. The scribe, in copying an older MS., first wrote the xx as it stood in the original, and then altered the sum to suit the standard of his own time. There can be no doubt that in the thirteenth century sixty pennies went to the eyrir. Thus Snorro Sturla’s son, in the Heimskringla, speaking of St. Olaf’s attempt to tax the Icelanders—“Penning . . . þann er x væri fyrir alin vaðmáls.” “A penny, ten of which would go for an ell of wadmal ;” as in Snorro’s time it is certain that six ells of wadmal went to the ounce, there would be sixty pennies in the ounce. At the same time the New Gula Thing’s code in Norway speaks of thirty pennies to the ounce. “En xxx peninga skal eyri hvern, hvárt sem gengr vegit eða talt.”—N. G. L. 1., 225. “But thirty pennies shall be in every eyrir, whether it be by weight or by tale.” It is very remarkable that Grágás speaks in two places of x pennies only as going to the eyrir, and that it calls silver of this kind “the old law-silver.” “Penning skal hann gefa goða þeim er hann leiðir í lög, þat skal hinn tíundi hlutr eyris vera.”—Gr. I., 357, 4to. “He (the thrall that is made free) shall give a penny to the priest who brings him into the law (who admits him to legal rights), that shall be the</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-5">These twenty ells were a margin or maketale, given over and above the proper quantity. They answer to the extra 6d. in the pound which was paid into the early English Exchequer when payments were made by weight (ad scalem), and answered to the Trebuchet in France, as so much thrown in to turn the scale. See Madox Hist. Excheq. ; and Thomas, “The Ancient Exchequer of England,” p. 25.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-6">The researches of M. C. A. Holmboe (De priscâ re Mone- tariâ Novegiæ Christ. 1844, p. 3. Comp. The Numismatic Chronicle, 1857, pp. 149-50) have shewn that the weight of the Norwegian eyrir or ounce was equal to 412·58 grains Troy.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-7">When it is said that this scatt-penny equalled three weighed pennies, this is another proof that the standard had been debased at the time when the account of the gift to Eyvind</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-8">This 5 ells is the fourth part of the 20 ells of margin.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-9">It is curious that the first of the kings who ruled in Eng- land, who gave systematically bad weight, was Canute.† This would be between 1017-36. The theoretical weight of the Anglo Saxon penny should be about 22 grains, and Ethelred the unready not only gave that amount, but more, some of his coins weighing as much as 26 grains. Canute’s, on the other hand, rarely exceed 16 grains, and in one instance fall as low as 13 ; still the silver was pure. We may infer from the following passage in the Saga of Harold the stern, who died A.D. 1066, that, up to his time, the coinage in Norway had not been debased. “ But when the eight day of Yule came, then their pay was given to the king’s men. That silver was called ‘ Harold’s coin,’ it was the more part copper. But when Haldor took his pay, he put it into the skirt of his cloak and looked at it, and it seemed to</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-10">This fact has been pointed out to the translator by his friend Mr. John Evans, F.S.A., of Nash Mills, whose authority on all matters relating to British and Anglo-Saxon coins is unquestionable.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-11">The following table will shew the relation of these two silver standards, as well as of the woollen currency or landaurar in the thirteenth century, when the standard of six ells to the silver ounce or eyrir was current. | Marks. | Marks. | Oz. | Örtug. | Oz. | Örtug. | Ells. | | (Mörk) | (Merkur) | (Aurar) | (Ortngar) | (Aurar) | (Ortugar) | (Alnir) of | | weighed | by tale | weighed | weighed | by tale | by tale | Wadmall, | | (vegin.) | (taldir.) | (vegnir.) | (vegnar.) | (taldir.) | (taldar.) | (vadmals.) |</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-12">Guðbrandr Vigfússon informs me that Kamness and Hrutstede are now valued at thirty-six, or nineteen, hundreds by the old and new Icelandic valuations respectively (see Skýrslur um Landshagi á Íslandi, I., 694, 5). It is plain that Unna’s portion was reckoned in the wadmal currency from Mord’s words afterwards with regard to Mord’s property in Norway, which was worth a hundred (120) marks. When Mord calls that much goods or money compared with what his daughter would have from him, he means, in fact, to say that his daughter’s portion, which was sixty hundreds in woollen, was little compared with this Norway inheritance of 120 marks by weight. If Unna’s portion had been sixty hundreds by weight or in silver, each worth two marks and a half, it would have been much more than a hundred marks in silver, and Mord could not have spoken of it as a small sum compared with Hrut’s inheritance.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-13">In Icelandic Mórendr, neut. mórendt; and modern Ice- landic móraudr, neut. mórautt. No one who has been in Shet- land can be in doubt as to the colour, for there he will find “moratt” or “morutt” everywhere used for the russet wool, which is the natural colour of so many of the fleeces in those islands. It is remarkable as showing the close connection which was kept up between Norway and Orkney and Shetland, that</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-14">This ring or sum of three marks runs throughout the Saga. Thus, when Mord reclaims Unna’s dower from Hrut, he couples his demand with a fine of three marks. Again Otkell and Skam- kell give Mord three marks for his help in finding out Hall- gerda’s theft. So again Hall of the Side gave Thorgeir the Priest</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-15">It is evident that throughout the Saga there is a doubt on the writer’s mind whether the blood-fine in the tenth century was one, or two hundreds, in silver. Though in one place we are told that two hundreds were then thought a good price for a man, in another Njal tells his sons that Gunnar, who had just paid him two hundreds in silver, had atoned for the foster-father, Thord Freedman’s son, as for two men. In the twelfth and thir- teenth centuries the number of hundreds paid was much higher.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-16">Kormak, the passionate lover, valued Steingerda dearer ; each of her eyes was worth three hundreds, her hair five hundreds, but all Steingerda was worth England, Ireland, Hunland, Den- mark, and Iceland.</p>
				<p id="note-appendix-14-17">If his fine was three times the sum often paid for freemen of position, or six hundreds, this amount would of course be doubled.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
