<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Icelandic Commonwealth</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="appendix-9" epub:type="appendix">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Icelandic Commonwealth</h2>
			<p>At length, about sixty years after the first settlement of the island, a step was taken towards turning Iceland into a commonwealth, and giving the whole island a legal constitution; and though we are ignorant of the immediate cause which led to this, we know enough of the state of things in the island to feel sure, that it could only have been with the common consent of the great chiefs, who, as Priests, presided over the various local Things. The first want was a man who could make a code of laws; the second was a common place of meeting. In the south-east of the island, at Lon, lived Ulfljót a man who had emigrated from Norway, and who, on the mother’s side, traced his descent from one of the royal houses of that country. The choice, no doubt, fell on him, because the men of that family were famous for their knowledge of the customary law, and Ulfljót betook himself to the old country to consult members of his house still wiser than himself. He sought the abode of Thorleif the wise, his mother’s brother, the same who shortly afterwards assisted King Hacon, the fosterchild of our great English Athelstane, in forming the old Gula-Thing’s Code. Three years he stayed abroad; and when he returned, the chiefs, who, no doubt, day by day felt more strongly the need of a common centre of action as well as of a common code, lost no time in carrying out their scheme. While Ulfljót was away, they had settled the most knotty part of the whole question, and that was⁠—where the great Thing, where the common place of meeting should be. While Ulfljót was doing the head work, his foster brother, Grim goat shoe⁠—a name, as Maurer remarks, probably taken from his skill as a crags man⁠—was doing what may be called the footwork of the scheme. He had been sent off to walk throughout the whole island, and seek a fitting spot for the commonwealth to meet. He found it south-west of the fells, where the broad lands of a freeman,<a href="#note-commonwealth-1" id="noteref-commonwealth-1" epub:type="noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> which had just been confiscated for murder, gave ample space for the annual gathering of some thousands of souls, and where there was an abundance of wood and water, as well as forage for their horses. There then, on that great sunken plain between the two Rifts, with the bright Thingvalla lake before it, and the huge Broadshield mountain looking down on it, was the Althing set in the year 929⁠–⁠930, and Ulfljót’s code solemnly adopted as the law of the land. Besides the accident of the confiscation, which happened so luckily just then, respect was no doubt paid to the natural advantages of the spot, which lies at the junction of the tracks which cross the desert wastes which fill the heart of the country; and some consideration was also felt for the fact that it also lay in the Thing of the priesthood founded by Ingolf, the first settler, the priest of which thus became what may be termed the high-priest of the island, inasmuch as the legal capital of the country was within his jurisdiction.<a href="#note-commonwealth-2" id="noteref-commonwealth-2" epub:type="noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> The time of the annual meeting was fixed at first for the middle of the month of June, but in the year 999 it was agreed to meet a week later, and the Althing then met when ten full weeks of summer had passed. It lasted fourteen days. These Icelandic weeks began on Thursday. The first summer day was on the Thursday which fell between the 9th and 15th of April, and the first day of the Althing would be somewhere between the 18th and 24th of June.<a href="#note-commonwealth-3" id="noteref-commonwealth-3" epub:type="noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> As all the judicial meetings of the Icelanders were in close connection with their religious rites, as Church and State were in fact identical, there can be no doubt that the Althing, in this point of view, was a faithful representation of the local Things. There, too, on the lava field, seamed and scarred with the fury of volcanic fire, solemn sacrifices and great feasts were held in honour of the gods. In its legal capacity it was both a deliberative and executive assembly; both Parliament and High Court of Justice in one. There was yet no distinction between these attributes of power. Of one thing we may be quite sure, this, that it was only the great chiefs, only the priests and others of influence, who had any voice in either function. The Icelandic State was an aristocracy, and though there was no spot on earth where there were so many chiefs, and where the common man, if one may be forgiven for playing on the words, was so uncommon, still the High Court, or Court of</p>
			<p>Laws (lögretta), at the Althing, was virtually in the hands of very few persons, constituting a committee. This was the “Court of Laws.” In this court the priests had great power. They were probably members of it ex officio, and each priest chose two assessors to sit in it along with him. When causes were to be tried they named the judges. In all trials the judges were bound to be unanimous in passing judgment. But with the Althing came a new office. In those days there were no books⁠—everything was traditional; the law itself was committed to memory and the custody of faithful lips. Time out of mind there had existed amongst the nations of the North, men who, like Ulfljót, had made the customary law their study, and learnt its traditional precepts by heart. There were the law men or lawyers (lögmenn), a class which we shall find still flourishing in the time of which our Saga tells. They were private persons, invested with no official character,* but who enjoyed all the influence which an exclusive knowledge of any one subject, and most of all of such a difficult subject as law, must necessarily give . * This statement is at issue with Maurer, but there is not in the passages which he has collected with so much research any proof that the lögmenn had an official position. They seem to have been simply law-skilled men, “counsel,” to whom men in need of advice betook themselves.</p>
			<p>to any man in an early state of society. But when the Althing was established we first hear of a law officer properly so called. This was what we have called the “ Speaker of the Law,” (Lögsögumaðr). His bounden duty it was to recite publicly the whole law within the space to which the tenure of his office was limited. To him, too, all who were in need of a legal opinion, or of information as to what was and was not law, had a right to turn during the meeting of the Althing. To him a sort of presidency or precedence at the Althing was conceded; but with a care whieh marks how jealously the young Republic guarded itself against bestowing too great power on its chief officer; he was expressly excluded from all share in the executive; and his tenure of office was restricted to three years, though he might be reelected at the end of that period.<a href="#note-commonwealth-4" id="noteref-commonwealth-4" epub:type="noteref"><sup>4</sup></a> On the whole, therefore, as Maurer well remarks, the office was a most honourable one, but except for the fortnight during which the sittings of the Althing lasted, it was, compared to the substantial power of the priests, both individually and as a body, one of little weight and influence. It was something, however, to have the whole control of the law of the land during the annual fortnight to which the legal existence of the commonwealth was limited. See, for instance, Thorgeir’s power at the Change of Faith, and Skapti’s decisions as to the law at the trial for the Burning.: With regard to the contents and extent of Ulfljót’s code, we have little information. We are told that it began with religious precepts, like the later Christian codes, and one of those injunctions, which may well provoke a smile, and which tells how superstitious the Icelanders were, has been handed down.<a href="#note-commonwealth-5" id="noteref-commonwealth-5" epub:type="noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> Another contained the order of proceedings, and the form of oath to be taken in the temples in judicial trials and suits. Every temple must contain a ring of at least two ounces in weight, and which the priest was to bear on his arm at all meetings where business of like nature was transacted. Every one who appeared before the court as party, witness, or judge, had to swear an oath on it, after it had been duly sprinkled with the blood of a victim⁠—“ So help him Njord, Frey, and the Almighty God,” that his cause, witness, or judgment was, to the best of his belief, right and just. It would, indeed, be unreasonable to imagine that the code contained much more than a collection of formularies for criminal prosecutions and civil suits, or that the memory of the earliest Speaker of the Law was more heavily burdened than with the recollection of those first elements of legislation. Ulfljót, as was right and fitting, was the first Speaker of the Law.<a href="#note-commonwealth-6" id="noteref-commonwealth-6" epub:type="noteref"><sup>6</sup></a></p>
			<p>With the establishment of the Althing we have for the first time a Commonwealth in Iceland. The Temples and Things and Courts of the Priests are no longer places for the transaction of the civil and religious business of separate communities, ruled by the heads of influential families, they are now subordinate parts of one State, and the centre of unity and supreme power was transferred to the Althing, as the civil and religious capital of the island. The first great blow had been struck at the patriarchal system and the voluntary principle; but though the priests lost something in the way of their independent power, and sunk in theory from little kings to sheriffs, they were amply compensated in practice by the introduction of a system which left their real influence in their local districts pretty much where it was, while it threw the Court of Laws, the very power which was superior to, and supposed to regulate their authority, into the hands of a committee chosen out of, or at least by, their own body.</p>
			<section id="commonwealth-provincial-organization">
				<h3>Provincial Organization</h3>
				<p>So things went on for about thirty years, when a very great step in social progress occurred, and along with it a corresponding change in the constitution of the Althing itself. This was the establishment of an organized provincial constitution of the country, by its division into Quarters or Provinces, each containing a certain number of local Things, each of which again contained a certain number of Priesthoods. The necessity of this arrangement had no doubt long been felt, but the immediate cause of its adoption was a bloody feud which arose out of the burning of one Blundkettle. This event is said to have happened in the year 962. It was the leading case of fire-raising before that of Njal. Up to that time the customary law had prescribed that all suits were to be pleaded in the Thing that lay nearest to the spot where the cause of action arose. Instead of following up the feud by revenge, the relations of the murdered man had pursued it at law; but when they came to plead it at the nearest Thing, their adversaries, who lived close to the court, mustered in great force, and would not allow the trial to come on. Now, the plaintiffs betook themselves to the Althing, as the Supreme Court, but there again the same scenes of violence occurred, the two sides came to blows, and many were slain, and though the plaintiffs had the best of the battle, the case was one that notoriously demanded legislative interference. Thord Gellir, therefore, a great chief, called on the Court of Laws to provide a remedy for a state of things which enjoined that a man must seek his lawful rights in the heart of his enemy’s country, and just in the very place where he was least likely to obtain them. To meet this difficulty, then, the island was divided into four Quarters (Fjórðungr), named sometimes from the points of the compass, and sometimes from the geographical features which that part of the country presented. Thus we hear indifferently of the Northlanders’ Quarter, or the Eyjafirthers’ Quarter; of the Westfirthers’ Quarter, or the Broadfirthers’ Quarter; of the Southlanders’ Quarter, or the Rangriver Quarter; and we also hear of an Eastfirthers’ Quarter. Each of these Quarters was next subdivided into three judicial districts (þingsoknir), the inhabitants of each of which had a common place of meeting (Thing), and were bound to attend the same local court. In the Northlanders’ Quarter there were four of these districts, because, when the subdivision was to be carried into effect, while the great Things of Eyjafirth and Skagafirth, which lay in the middle of the Quarter, were necessarily maintained, the dwellers to the east of the first, and to the west of the other, refused to go so far to a common place of meeting. But as we shall see, this was merely a provincial arrangement, and in the eyes of the central authority, the four North land Things only reckoned as three. Each of those Quarters had its Quarter Thing (Fjórðungsþing), and each of its subdivisions had its Vernal Thing (Várþing), in which certain suits were in the first place set on foot, then carried to the Quarter Court, and thence, if need were, to the Althing. Furthermore, in each of the subdivisions there were three chief temples (höfuðhof), mother churches as we should call them, to which the most distinguished persons holding priesthoods (goðorð) in each subdivision were chosen. Thus we have three Priesthoods to each local Thing, and three local Things to each Quarter Thing, and four</p>
				<p>Quarter Things to the whole island, as represented at the Althing. But with this arrangement came a change in the constitution of powers at the Althing itself. Up to this time there had been but one supreme body or committee at the Althing, the Court of Laws or Lögretta, which combined the functions of a deliberative and legislative assembly, with those of a Supreme Court. Now the executive and deliberative were separated from the judicial attributes. The Court of Laws retained the former, while the latter were distributed among four Courts, representing the four Quarters, and before which all suits brought before the Althing relating to those Quarters had to be pleaded. For the rest, the judges in those courts were named by the priests as before, and they themselves all sat, now perhaps for the first time as a body, in the Court of Laws itself. With regard to the Priesthoods themselves, it is plain that a great change now took place. Their number was now limited. There could now be but thirty-six priesthoods recognised by the State throughout the whole island; or if regard were had to the peculiar arrangement in the north, thirty-nine. We say priesthoods, because the office, by the subdivision of property, could now be held by several persons at once, though the State only recognised their acts as the acts of one. Again, though any one who had means and influence enough might still build a temple and gather followers and Thingmen around him; still, his new temple would not be one of the recognised temples, and he would not be a priest in the sense required by the Constitution. His temple in fact would be a Temple of Ease, it would not be a mother Temple, or as we should say, a mother or parish church, and though it was allowed to exist, it existed without any legal rights as part of the machinery of civil government. The institution, therefore, while it gave to the greater portion of, and it may be to all, the old temples exclusive rights, and was thus calculated to strengthen the power of each priest whose temple had now a legal existence, taught him, at the same time, to look to the State rather than to the family for the title-deeds of his right. The second great blow, in short, had been struck at the patriarchal, and, along with it, at the voluntary system. The State was extending its power and authority from the national centre to the provinces, and binding them still closer to itself. With regard to the way in which the grievance of which Thord Gellir complained, was remedied, it lay in this. Up to that time, each priesthood had possessed a court of its own, and after that time continued to possess it, but only as a private court, something like those of our Lords of the Manor. But henceforth, at the bidding of the central power, the Thingmen of three priesthoods met in one Vernal Thing, and thus the plaintiff or the defendant might hope for a better chance of justice from an assembly presided over by several chiefs, than if he had to sue for it at the hands of one priest and his dependents, whom the very fact that gave rise to his suit had made his enemy. Under the old state of things the priest could hardly fail to have a leaning to one side or the other, and justice could not be even-handed. These Spring Things, therefore, answered well, and we hear much of them. Of the Quarter Things (Fjórðungsþing), which must be most carefully distinguished from the Quarter Courts at the Althing (Fjórðungsdómr), we hear less, and it is probable that they went into disuse, from the fact that if it were impossible to obtain a decision at the Spring Thing, or court of first instance, the suit would be carried at once to the Quarter Court at the Althing, as the highest tribunal. For the rest, the Spring Thing was a pattern of the Althing on a little scale; each had its Thingbrekka, or Hill of Laws, where certain notices and proclamations were given, there, too, the judges were bound to be unanimous in their sentences, and there too, the time-honoured number of judges was maintained, since each of the three priests who presided in turn named twelve judges, thirty-six in all; for as the words of the law ran, “three twelves were to judge in all suits.” Besides the Vernal Thing, there was an autumn court, (Leið<a href="#note-commonwealth-7" id="noteref-commonwealth-7" epub:type="noteref"><sup>7</sup></a>) also held by the three priests of the district. It met fourteen days after the Althing was over, lasted two days, and was a court of information and execution, in order that matters which had been decided at the Althing might be carried into effect, and brought before the notice of freemen, who for any reason had been unable to undertake the annual journey to the Althing. Like every other legally constituted assembly, other matters might be lawfully brought before it. Under the new system, we have certain information as to the constitution of the Court of Laws, so dark in the first days of the Althing. First of all, the thirty nine priests sate in it (36 + 3); but in order to counterbalance the preponderance of the three extra priests from the north, three men were chosen from each of the three other Quarters by the priests who represented it, so that the whole number on the bench of the priests was forty-eight (39 + 9). Each of these forty-eight chose two men as his assessors, who sate, the one on a bench before, and the other on a bench behind him, he himself sitting on the middle bench. The whole Court of Laws consisted therefore of 144, and reckoning the Speaker of the Laws, who now sate in it as president, of 145 persons.<a href="#note-commonwealth-8" id="noteref-commonwealth-8" epub:type="noteref"><sup>8</sup></a> With regard to voting, each member exercised an equal right. With regard to the four Quarter Courts (Fjórðungsdómr), they were so constituted; each priest named one judge for each of the four courts, four therefore in all, out of the frequenters of his Thing; but as the priests of the North Quarter were to have no peculiar privileges, and as it is expressly stated that thirty six judges were named from each Quarter, it is plain that each of the priests from that Quarter could only name three instead of four men as judges. According to this calculation, each Quarter Court consisted of thirty-six judges; so that here again the timehonoured three twelves meet us, and the whole number of judges named for the four Quarter Courts is 144, or exactly the same number as those entitled to sit in the Court of Laws.</p>
			</section>
			<hr/>
			<section id="commonwealth-endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Notes</h3>
				<p id="note-commonwealth-1"><a href="#noteref-commonwealth-1">1</a> The name of the murdered man was Kol, and that of the murderer Thorir cropbeard. They were a bad family. Thorwalld cropbeard, a grandson of Thorir, settled afterwards in the east country, and there burnt his own brother Gunnar in his house. He was also with Flosi at Njal’s burning, and was killed in the battle at the Althing. See Snorri’s words to Flosi on the occasion, ch. 144, vol. ii. p. 275.</p>
				<p id="note-commonwealth-2"><a href="#noteref-commonwealth-2">2</a> The Icelandic term is Allsherjargoði⁠—“The priest of the whole host”⁠—under whom the whole host or body of men at the Thing for the time stood. So also the Alþing is called Allsherjarþing; and goods or property confiscated to the commonwealth Allsherjarfé.</p>
				<p id="note-commonwealth-3"><a href="#noteref-commonwealth-3">3</a> After the subversion of the Republic, the opening of the Althing was advanced to the feast of St. Peter and St. Paul, that is, to the 29th of June, and at later times, to the 3d and 5th of July. The Althing continued to meet annually on the old spot till 1800, when it was abolished. In 1845 it was restored, but it now sits at Reykjavík.</p>
				<p id="note-commonwealth-4"><a href="#noteref-commonwealth-4">4</a> It is true that many of the Speakers of the Law were reelected over and over again, but the principle of the right to make a fresh choice was always asserted.</p>
				<p id="note-commonwealth-5"><a href="#noteref-commonwealth-5">5</a> This was the injunction to the captains of ships to take off the frightful figure-heads of their ships when they made the coast, lest the guardian spirits of the land should be scared.</p>
				<p id="note-commonwealth-6"><a href="#noteref-commonwealth-6">6</a> We are not told whether Ulfljót received any other reward for his skill in legislation; his foster-brother Grim got, for his trouble in finding out the best spot for the Althing, a penny (penning) from every household in the island, which he generously made over to the temples. The following is the list of the Speakers of the Law for the first hundred years:⁠—Ulfljót, Rafn Heing’s son, 930⁠–⁠949; Thorarinn Ragi’s brother, 950⁠–⁠969; Thorkell máni, 970⁠–⁠984; Thorgeir the priest of Lightwater, 985⁠–⁠1001; Grim Sverting’s son, 10021003; and Skapti Thorod’s son, 1004⁠–⁠1030. Almost all of these are mentioned in the Njal’s Saga. We may add, that after all, there is some doubt whether Ulfljót ever held the office, as in some lists his name is omitted altogether. In any case, his tenure of office could hardly have lasted more than one year.</p>
				<p id="note-commonwealth-7"><a href="#noteref-commonwealth-7">7</a> Compare the English “Leet.”</p>
				<p id="note-commonwealth-8"><a href="#noteref-commonwealth-8">8</a> In later times the bishops were added, but in the days of which we write there were no bishops in Iceland.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
