<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Of Kolskegg: How He Was Baptized</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-80" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Of Kolskegg: How He Was Baptized</h2>
			<p>Now it is to be told of Kolskegg how he comes to Norway, and is in the Bay east that winter. But the summer after he fares east to Denmark, and bound himself to Sweyn Forkbeard the Dane-king, and there he had great honour.</p>
			<p>One night he dreamt that a man came to him; he was bright and glistening, and he thought he woke him up. He spoke, and said to him, “Stand up and come with me.”</p>
			<p>“What wilt thou with me?” he asks.</p>
			<p>“I will get thee a bride, and thou shalt be my knight.”</p>
			<p>He thought he said yea to that, and after that he woke up.</p>
			<p>Then he went to a wizard and told him the dream, but he read it so that he should fare to southern lands and become God’s knight.</p>
			<p>Kolskegg was baptized in Denmark, but still he could not rest there, but fared east to Russia, and was there one winter. Then he fared thence out to Micklegarth,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-80-1" id="noteref-80-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> and there took service with the Emperor. The last that was heard of him was, that he wedded a wife there, and was captain over the Varangians, and stayed there till his deathday; and he, too, is out of this story.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
