<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Flosi’s Journey From Home</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-125" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Flosi’s Journey From Home</h2>
			<p>Flosi busked him from the east when two months were still to winter, and summoned to him all his men who had promised him help and company. Each of them had two horses and good weapons, and they all came to Swinefell, and were there that night.</p>
			<p>Flosi made them say prayers betimes on the Lord’s day, and afterwards they sate down to meat. He spoke to his household, and told them what work each was to do while he was away. After that he went to his horses.</p>
			<p>Flosi and his men rode first west on the Sand.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-125-1" id="noteref-125-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> Flosi bade them not to ride too hard at first; but said they would do well enough at that pace, and he bade all to wait for the others if any of them had need to stop. They rode west to Woodcombe, and came to Kirkby. Flosi there bade all men to come into the church, and pray to God, and men did so.</p>
			<p>After that they mounted their horses, and rode on the fell, and so to Fishwaters, and rode a little to the west of the lakes, and so struck down west on to the Sand.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-125-2" id="noteref-125-2" epub:type="noteref">2</a> Then they left Eyjafell Jokul on their left hand, and so came down into Godaland, and so on to Markfleet, and came about nones<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-125-3" id="noteref-125-3" epub:type="noteref">3</a> on the second day of the week to Threecorner ridge, and waited till mid-even. Then all had came thither save Ingialld of the Springs.</p>
			<p>The sons of Sigfus spoke much ill of him, but Flosi bade them not blame Ingialld when he was not by, “But we will pay him for this hereafter.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
