<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Of Asgrim And Gudmund</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-139" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Of Asgrim And Gudmund</h2>
			<p>And when they came into the booth then they saw where Gudmund the Powerful sate and talked with Einar Conal’s son, his foster-child; he was a wise man.</p>
			<p>Then they come before him, and Gudmund welcomed them very heartily, and made them clear the booth for them, that they might all be able to sit down.</p>
			<p>Then they asked what tidings, and Asgrim said, “There is no need to mutter what I have to say. We wish, Gudmund, to ask for thy steadfast help.”</p>
			<p>“Have ye seen any other chiefs before?” said Gudmund.</p>
			<p>They said they had been to see Skapti Thorod’s son and Snorri the Priest, and told him quietly how they had fared with each of them.</p>
			<p>Then Gudmund said, “Last time I behaved badly and meanly to you. Then I was stubborn, but now ye shall drive your bargain with me all the more quickly because I was more stubborn then, and now I will go myself with you to the court with all my Thing-men, and stand by you in all such things as I can, and fight for you though this be needed, and lay down my life for your lives. I will also pay Skapti out in this way, that Thorstein Gape-mouth his son shall be in the battle on our side, for he will not dare to do aught else than I will, since he has Jodisa my daughter to wife, and then Skapti will try to part us.”</p>
			<p>They thanked him, and talked with him long and low afterwards, so that no other men could hear.</p>
			<p>Then Gudmund bade them not to go before the knees of any other chiefs, for he said that would be little-hearted.</p>
			<p>“We will now run the risk with the force that we have. Ye must go with your weapons to all law-business, but not fight as things stand.”</p>
			<p>Then they went all of them home to their booths, and all this was at first with few men’s knowledge.</p>
			<p>So now the Thing goes on.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
