<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Of Mord and Njal’s Sons</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-107" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2>Of Mord and Njal’s Sons</h2>
			<p>Some while after Mord rode to Bergthorsknoll and saw Skarphedinn there; he fell into very fair words with them, and so he talked the whole day, and said he wished to be good friends with them, and to see much of them.</p>
			<p>Skarphedinn took it all well, but said he had never sought for anything of the kind before. So it came about that he got himself into such great friendship with them, that neither side thought they had taken any good counsel unless the other had a share in it.</p>
			<p>Njal always disliked his coming thither, and it often happened that he was angry with him.</p>
			<p>It happened one day that Mord came to Bergthorsknoll, and Mord said to Njal’s sons, “I have made up my mind to give a feast yonder, and I mean to drink in my heirship after my father, but to that feast I wish to bid you, Njal’s sons, and Kari; and at the same time I give you my word that ye shall not fare away giftless.”</p>
			<p>They promised to go, and now he fares home and makes ready the feast. He bade to it many householders, and that feast was very crowded.</p>
			<p>Thither came Njal’s sons and Kari. Mord gave Skarphedinn a brooch of gold, and a silver belt to Kari, and good gifts to Grim and Helgi.</p>
			<p>They come home and boast of these gifts, and show them to Njal. He said they would be bought full dear, “and take heed that ye do not repay the giver in the coin which he no doubt wishes to get.”</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
