<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Of Thorgeir Craggeir</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-136" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Of Thorgeir Craggeir</h2>
			<p>Thorgeir Craggeir rode from the east with much people. His brothers were with him, Thorleif Crow and Thorgrim the Big. They came to Hof, to Mord Valgard’s son’s house, and bided there till he was ready. Mord had gathered every man who could bear arms, and they could see nothing about him but that he was most steadfast in everything, and now they rode until they came west across the rivers. Then they waited for Hjallti Skeggi’s son. He came after they had waited a short while, and they greeted him well, and rode afterwards all together till they came to Reykia in Bishop’s tongue, and bided there for Asgrim Ellidagrim’s son, and he came to meet them there. Then they rode west across Bridgewater. Then Asgrim told them all that had passed between him and Flosi; and Thorgeir said, “I would that we might try their bravery ere the Thing closes.”</p>
			<p>They rode until they came to Baitvale. There Gizur the White came to meet them with a very great company, and they fell to talking together. Then they rode to the Upper Field, and drew up all their men in array there, and so rode to the Thing.</p>
			<p>Flosi and his men all took to their arms, and it was within an ace that they would fall to blows. But Asgrim and his friends and their followers would have no hand in it, and rode to their booths; and now all was quiet that day, so that they had naught to do with one another. Thither were come chiefs from all the Quarters of the land; there had never been such a crowded Thing before, that men could call to mind.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
