<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Of Fines and Atonements</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-65" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 >Of Fines and Atonements</h2>
			<p>Gunnar, and the sons of Sigfus, and Njal’s sons, went altogether in one band, and they marched so swiftly and closely that men who came in their way had to take heed lest they should get a fall; and nothing was so often spoken about over the whole Thing as these great lawsuits.</p>
			<p>Gunnar went to meet his cousins, and Olaf and his men greeted him well. They asked Gunnar about the fight, but he told them all about it, and was just in all he said; he told them, too, what steps he had taken since.</p>
			<p>Then Olaf said, “ ’Tis worth much to see how close Njal stands by thee in all counsel.”</p>
			<p>Gunnar said he should never be able to repay that, but then he begged them for help; and they said that was his due.</p>
			<p>Now the suits on both sides came before the court, and each pleads his cause.</p>
			<p>Mord asked, “How it was that a man could have the right to set a suit on foot who, like Gunnar, had already made himself an outlaw by striking Thorgeir a blow?”</p>
			<p>“Wast thou,” answered Njal, “at Thingskala-Thing last autumn?”</p>
			<p>“Surely I was,” says Mord.</p>
			<p>“Heardest thou,” asks Njal, “how Gunnar offered him full atonement? Then I gave back Gunnar his right to do all lawful deeds.”</p>
			<p>“That is right and good law,” says Mord, “but how does the matter stand if Gunnar has laid the slaying of Hjort at Kol’s door, when it was the Easterling that slew him?”</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“That was right and lawful,” says Njal, “when he chose him as the slayer before witnesses.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“That was lawful and right, no doubt,” says Mord; “but for what did Gunnar summon them all as outlaws?”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Thou needest not to ask about that,” says Njal, “when they went out to deal wounds and manslaughter.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Yes,” says Mord, “but neither befell Gunnar.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>“Gunnar’s brothers,” said Njal, “Kolskegg and Hjort, were there, and one of them got his death and the other a flesh wound.”</p>
			<p>“Thou speakest nothing but what is law,” says Mord, “though it is hard to abide by it.”</p>
			<p>Then Hiallti Skeggi’s son of Thursodale, stood forth and said. “I have had no share in any of your lawsuits; but I wish to know whether thou wilt do something, Gunnar, for the sake of my words and friendship.”</p>
			<p>“What askest thou?” says Gunnar.</p>
			<p>“This,” he says, “that ye lay down the whole suit to the award and judgment of good men and true.”</p>
			<p>“If I do so,” said Gunnar, “then thou shalt never be against me, whatever men I may have to deal with.”</p>
			<p>“I will give my word to that,” says Hjallti.</p>
			<p>After that he tried his best with Gunnar’s adversaries, and brought it about that they were all set at one again. And after that each side gave the other pledges of peace; but for Thorgeir’s wound came the suit for seduction, and for the hewing in the wood, Starkad’s wound. Thorgeir’s brothers were atoned for by half fines, but half fell away for the onslaught on Gunnar. Egil’s slaying and Tyrfing’s lawsuit were set off against each other. For Hjort’s slaying, the slaying of Kol and of the Easterling were to come, and as for all the rest, they were atoned for with half fines.</p>
			<p>Njal was in this award, and Asgrim Ellidagrim’s son, and Hjallti</p>
			<p>Skeggi’s son.</p>
			<p>Njal had much money out at interest with Starkad, and at Sandgil too, and he gave it all to Gunnar to make up these fines.</p>
			<p>So many friends had Gunnar at the Thing, that he not only paid up there and then all the fines on the spot, but gave besides gifts to many chiefs who had lent him help; and he had the greatest honour from the suit; and all were agreed in this, that no man was his match in all the South Quarter.</p>
			<p>So Gunnar rides home from the Thing and sits there in peace, but still his adversaries envied him much for his honour.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
