<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Of Fiddle Mord</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-1" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Of Fiddle Mord</h2>
			<p>There​​​​​‌‌‌‌​‌​‌​‌‌​‌​‌​‌​‌​‌​‌‌​​​‌​​‌‌‌‌‌‌​‌​‌‌​​‌​​​‌‌​​​‌​‌‌‌​​‌​​​​‌‌‌‌​‌‌‌​‌‌​​​‌​​​​​‌‌‌‌‌​​​​​‌‌‌‌‌‌‌‌​​​‌​‌‌‌​​‌‌​‌​​‌​‌‌​​​‌‌‌‌‌​​‌​‌​​‌​​​‌​​​​‌‌​​​‌​‌​​​​‌​​‌‌‌​‌​​​​​​‌‌​​‌​‌‌‌‌​​‌​‌‌​‌​​‌​‌​‌​‌‌‌​‌​​‌‌​‌​‌‌‌‌‌‌​​‌‌‌‌‌‌​‌​​​‌‌​‌‌​‌​​‌‌‌​​‌‌​​​​‌​ was a man named Mord whose surname was Fiddle; he was the son of Sigvat the Red, and he dwelt at the “Vale” in the Rangrivervales. He was a mighty chief, and a great taker up of suits, and so great a lawyer that no judgments were thought lawful unless he had a hand in them. He had an only daughter, named Unna. She was a fair, courteous, and gifted woman, and that was thought the best match in all the Rangrivervales.</p>
			<p>Now the story turns westward to the Broadfirth dales, where, at Hauskuldstede, in Laxriverdale, dwelt a man named Hauskuld, who was Dalakoll’s son, and his mother’s name was Thorgerda.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-1-1" id="noteref-1-1" epub:type="noteref">1</a> He had a brother named Hrut, who dwelt at Hrutstede; he was of the same mother as Hauskuld, but his father’s name was Heriolf. Hrut was handsome, tall and strong, well skilled in arms, and mild of temper; he was one of the wisest of men⁠—stern towards his foes, but a good counsellor on great matters. It happened once that Hauskuld bade his friends to a feast, and his brother Hrut was there, and sat next him. Hauskuld had a daughter named Hallgerda, who was playing on the floor with some other girls. She was fair of face and tall of growth, and her hair was as soft as silk; it was so long, too, that it came down to her waist. Hauskuld called out to her, “Come hither to me, daughter.” So she went up to him, and he took her by the chin, and kissed her; and after that she went away.</p>
			<p>Then Hauskuld said to Hrut, “What dost thou think of this maiden? Is she not fair?” Hrut held his peace. Hauskuld said the same thing to him a second time, and then Hrut answered, “Fair enough is this maid, and many will smart for it, but this I know not, whence thief’s eyes have come into our race.” Then Hauskuld was wroth, and for a time the brothers saw little of each other.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
