<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Woof of War</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-156-a" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">The Woof of War</h2>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“See! warp is stretched</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For warriors’ fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Lo! weft in loom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Tis wet with blood;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now fight foreboding,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>’Neath friends’ swift fingers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our grey woof waxeth</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With war’s alarms,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our warp bloodred,</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Our weft corseblue.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“This woof is y-woven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With entrails of men,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This warp is hardweighted</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With heads of the slain,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Spears blood-besprinkled</span>
					<br/>
					<span>For spindles we use,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our loom ironbound,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And arrows our reels;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With swords for our shuttles</span>
					<br/>
					<span>This war-woof we work;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>So weave we, weird sisters,</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Our warwinning woof.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“Now Warwinner walketh</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To weave in her turn,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Swordswinger steppeth,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now Swiftstroke, now Storm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When they speed the shuttle</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How spearheads shall flash!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shields crash, and helmgnawer (3)</span>
					<br/>
					<span>On harness bite hard!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“Wind we, wind swiftly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our warwinning woof</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Woof erst for king youthful</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Foredoomed as his own,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Forth now we will ride,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then through the ranks rushing</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Be busy where friends</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Blows blithe give and take.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“Wind we, wind swiftly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Our warwinning woof,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>After that let us steadfastly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Stand by the brave king;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Then men shall mark mournful</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Their shields red with gore,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>How Swordstroke and Spearthrust</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Stood stout by the prince.</p>
			<p>“Wind we, wind swiftly</p>
			<p>Our warwinning woof.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>When sword-bearing rovers</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To banners rush on,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Mind, maidens, we spare not</span>
					<br/>
					<span>One life in the fray!</span>
					<br/>
					<span>We corse-choosing sisters</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Have charge of the slain.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“Now new-coming nations</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That island shall rule,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Who on outlying headlands</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Abode ere the fight;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I say that King mighty</span>
					<br/>
					<span>To death now is done,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now low before spearpoint</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>That Earl bows his head.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“Soon over all Ersemen</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sharp sorrow shall fall,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>That woe to those warriors</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Shall wane nevermore;</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Our woof now is woven.</p>
			<p>Now battlefield waste,</p>
			<p>O’er land and o’er water</p>
			<p>War tidings shall leap.</p>
			<p>“Now surely ’tis gruesome</p>
			<p>To gaze all around.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>When bloodred through heaven</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Drives cloudrack o’er head;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Air soon shall be deep hued</span>
					<br/>
					<span>With dying men’s blood</span>
					<br/>
					<span>When this our spaedom</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Comes speedy to pass.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“So cheerily chant we</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Charms for the young king,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Come maidens lift loudly</span>
					<br/>
					<span>His warwinning lay;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Let him who now listens</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Learn well with his ears</span>
					<br/>
					<span>And gladden brave swordsmen</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>With bursts of war’s song.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“Now mount we our horses,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now bare we our brands,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Now haste we hard, maidens,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Hence far, far, away.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Then they plucked down the Woof and tore it asunder, and each kept what she had hold of.</p>
			<p>Now Daurrud goes away from the Slit, and home; but they got on their steeds and rode six to the south, and the other six to the north.</p>
			<p>A like event befell Brand Gneisti’s son in the Faroe Isles.</p>
			<p>At Swinefell, in Iceland, blood came on the priest’s stole on</p>
			<p>Good-Friday, so that he had to put it off.</p>
			<p>At Thvattwater the priest thought he saw on Good-Friday a long deep of the sea hard by the altar, and there he saw many awful sights, and it was long ere he could sing the prayers.</p>
			<p>This event happened in the Orkneys, that Hareck thought he saw Earl Sigurd, and some men with him. Then Hareck took his horse and rode to meet the earl. Men saw that they met and rode under a brae, but they were never seen again, and not a scrap was ever found of Hareck.</p>
			<p>Earl Gilli in the Southern isles dreamed that a man came to him and said his name was Hostfinn, and told him he was come from Ireland.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>The earl thought he asked him for tidings thence, and then he sang this song:</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“I have been where warriors wrestled,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>High in Erin sang the sword,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Boss to boss met many bucklers,</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Steel rung sharp on rattling helm;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>I can tell of all their struggle;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Sigurd fell in flight of spears;</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Brian fell, but kept his kingdom</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Ere he lost one drop of blood.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Those two, Flosi and the earl, talked much of this dream. A week after, Hrafn the Red came thither, and told them all the tidings of Brian’s battle, the fall of the king, and of Earl Sigurd, and Brodir, and all the Vikings.</p>
			<blockquote epub:type="z3998:poem">
				<p>
					<span>“What,” said Flosi, “hast thou to tell me of my men?</span>
					<br/>
					<span>“They all fell there,” says Hrafn, “but thy brother-in-law</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Thorstein took peace from Kerthialfad, and is now with him.”</span>
					<br/>
					<span>Flosi told the earl that he would now go away, “For we have our pilgrimage south to fulfil.”</span>
				</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>The earl bade him go as he wished, and gave him a ship and all else that he needed, and much silver.</p>
			<p>Then they sailed to Wales, and stayed there a while.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
