<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Glum’s Sheep Hunt</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Glum’s Sheep Hunt</h2>
			<p>Now once on a time when autumn came, it happened that men had hard work to get their flocks home, and many of Glum’s wethers were missing. Then Glum said to Thiostolf, “Go thou up on the fell with my house-carles and see if ye cannot find out anything about the sheep.”</p>
			<p>“ ’Tis no business of mine,” says Thiostolf, “to hunt up sheep, and this one thing is quite enough to hinder it. I won’t walk in thy thralls’ footsteps. But go thyself, and then I’ll go with thee.”</p>
			<p>About this they had many words. The weather was good, and Hallgerda was sitting out of doors. Glum went up to her and said, “Now Thiostolf and I have had a quarrel, and we shall not live much longer together.” And so he told her all that they had been talking about.</p>
			<p>Then Hallgerda spoke up for Thiostolf, and they had many words about him. At last Glum gave her a blow with his hand, and said, “I will strive no longer with thee,” and with that he went away.</p>
			<p>Now she loved him much, and could not calm herself, but wept out loud. Thiostolf went up to her and said, “This is sorry sport for thee, and so it must not be often again.”</p>
			<p>“Nay,” she said, “but thou shalt not avenge this, nor meddle at all whatever passes between Glum and me.”</p>
			<p>He went off with a spiteful grin.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
