<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Icelandic Chronology</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section epub:type="titlepage">
			<header>
				<h2 epub:type="title">Icelandic Chronology</h2>
			</header>
			<table epub:type="z3998:chronology">
				<tbody>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">850</th>
						<td>Birth of Harold fairhair.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">860</th>
						<td>Harold fairhair comes to the throne.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">870</th>
						<td>Harold fairhair sole King in Norway.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">871</th>
						<td>Ingolf sets out for Iceland.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">872</th>
						<td>Battle of Hafrsfirth (Hafrsfjörðr).</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">874</th>
						<td>Ingolf and Leif go to settle in Iceland.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">877</th>
						<td>Kettle hæng goes to Iceland.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">880-884</th>
						<td>Harold fairhair roots out the Vikings in the west.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">888</th>
						<td>Fall of Thorstein the red in Scotland.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">890-900</th>
						<td>Rush of settlers from the British Isles to Iceland.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">892</th>
						<td>Aud the deeply wealthy comes to Iceland.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">900-920</th>
						<td>The third period of the Landnámstide.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">920</th>
						<td>Harold fairhair shares the kingdom with his sons.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">923</th>
						<td>Hrut Hauskuld's brother born.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">929</th>
						<td>Althing established.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">930</th>
						<td>Hrafn Kettle hæng's son Speaker of the Law.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">930-935</th>
						<td>Njal born.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">930</th>
						<td>The Fleetlithe feud begins.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">933</th>
						<td>Death of Harold fairhair.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">940</th>
						<td>End of the Fleetlithe feud ; Fiddle Mord a man of rank ; Hamond Gunuar's son marries Mord's sister Rannveiga.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">941</th>
						<td>Fall of King Eric Bloodaxe.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">959</th>
						<td>Glum marries Hallgerda.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">960</th>
						<td>Fall of King Hacon, Athelstane's foster-child Harold Grayfell, King in Norway.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">963</th>
						<td>Hrut goes abroad.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">965</th>
						<td>Hrut returns to Iceland, and marries Unna Mord's daughter.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">968</th>
						<td>Unna parts from Hrut.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">969</th>
						<td>Fiddle Mord and Hrut strive at the Althing. Fall of King Harold Grayfell. Earl Hacon rules in Norway. 970-71. Fiddle Mord's death ; Gunnar and Hrut strive at the Althing.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">972</th>
						<td>Gunnar of Lithend goes abroad.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">974</th>
						<td>Gunnar returns to Iceland.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">974</th>
						<td>Gunnar's marriage with Hallgerda.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">975</th>
						<td>The slaying of Swart.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">976</th>
						<td>The slaying of Kol.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">977</th>
						<td>The slaying of Atli.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">978</th>
						<td>The slaying of Brynjolf the unruly, and Thord Freedmanson.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">979</th>
						<td>The slaying of Sigmund the white.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">983</th>
						<td>Hallgerda steals from Otkell at Kirkby.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">984</th>
						<td>The suit for the theft settled at the Althing.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">985</th>
						<td>Otkell rides over Gunnar in the spring ; fight at Rangriver just before the Althing ; at the Al-thing Geir the priest and Gunnar strive ; in the autumn Hauskuld Dale-Kolli's son, Gunnar's father-in-law, dies ; birth of Hauskuld Thrain's son.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">986</th>
						<td>The fight at Knafahills, and death of Hjort Gunnar's brother.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">987</th>
						<td>The suit for those slain at Knafahills settled at the Althing.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">988</th>
						<td>Gunnar goes west to visit Olaf the peacock.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">989</th>
						<td>Slaying of Thorgeir Otkell's son before, and banish-ment of Gunnar at, the Althing ; Njal's sons Helgi and Grim, and Thrain Sigfus' son, go abroad.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">990</th>
						<td>Gunnar slain at Lithend.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">992</th>
						<td>Thrain returns to Iceland with Hrapp; Njal's sons ill treated by Earl Hacon for his sake.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">994</th>
						<td>Njal's sons return to Iceland, bringing Kari with</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">995</th>
						<td>Death of Earl Hacon; Olaf Tryggvi's son King of Norway.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">996</th>
						<td>Skarphedinn slays Thrain.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">997</th>
						<td>Thangbrand sent by King Olaf to preach Chris-tianity in Iceland.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">998</th>
						<td>Slaying of Arnor of Forswaterwood by Flosi's brothers at Skaptarfells Thing (Njal, II. p. 123); Thangbrand's missionary journey; Gizur and Hjallti go abroad.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">999</th>
						<td>Hjallti Skeggis son found guilty of blasphemy against the Gods at the Althing; Thangbrand returns to Norway.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">1000</th>
						<td>Gizur and Hjallti return to Iceland ; the Change of Faith, and Christianity brought into the law at the Althing on St. John's day, June 24th. Fall of King Olaf Tryggvi's son at Svoldr, Sept. 9th.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">1001</th>
						<td>Thorgeir the priest of Lightwater gives up the Speakership of the Law.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">1002</th>
						<td>Grim of Mossfell Speaker of the Law.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">1003</th>
						<td>Grim lays down the Speakership. 1003 or 1004. Skapti Thorod's son Speaker of the Law ; the Fifth Court established ; Hauskuld Thrain's son marries Hildigunna Flosi's niece, and has one of the new priesthoods at Whiteness.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">1006</th>
						<td>Duels abolished in legal matters ; slaying of Hau-skuld Njal's son by Lyting and his brothers.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">1009</th>
						<td>Amund the blind slays Lyting ; Valgard the guile-ful comes back to Iceland ; his evil counsel to</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">1011</th>
						<td>Hauskuld the Whiteness priest slain early in the spring ; suit for his manslaughter at the Althing ; Njal's Burning the autumn after.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">1012</th>
						<td>The suit for the Burning, and battle at the Al-thing ; Flosi and the Burners banished ; Kari and Thorgeir Craggeir carry on the feud.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">1013</th>
						<td>Flosi goes abroad with the Burners, and Kari follows them ; Flosi and Kari in Orkney.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">1014</th>
						<td>Brian's battle on Good Friday, Flosi goes to Rome.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">1015</th>
						<td>Flosi returns from Rome to Norway, and stays with Earl Eric, Earl Hacon's son.</td>
					</tr>
					<tr>
						<th scope="row">1016</th>
						<td>Flosi returns to Iceland ; Kari goes to Rome, and returns to Caithness ; his wife Helga dies out in Iceland.</td>
					</tr>
				</tbody>
			</table>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
