<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<p id="note-1-1">Thorgerda was daughter of Thorstein the Red who was Olaf the White’s son, Ingialld’s son, Helgi’s son. Ingialld’s mother was Thora, daughter of Sigurd Snake-i’-the-eye, who was Ragnar Hairybreek’s son. And the Deeply-wealthy was Thorstein the Red’s mother; she was daughter of Kettle Flatnose, who was Bjorn Boun’s son, Grim’s son, Lord of Sogn in Norway. <a href="chapter-1.xhtml#noteref-1-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-5-1">Oresound, the gut between Denmark and Sweden, at the entrance of the Baltic, commonly called in English, the Sound. <a href="chapter-5.xhtml#noteref-5-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-9-1">That is, he came from what we call the Western Isles or Hebrides. The old appellation still lingers in “Sodor (i.e. the South Isles) and Man.” <a href="chapter-9.xhtml#noteref-9-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-19-1">She was the daughter of Sigfuss, the son of Sighvat the Red; he was slain at Sandhol Ferry. <a href="chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-19-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-19-2">He was the son of Gunnar Baugsson, after whom Gunnar’s holt is called. Hamond’s mother’s name was Hrafnhilda. She was the daughter of Storolf Heing’s son. Storolf was brother to Hrafn the Speaker of the Law, the son of Storolf was Orin the Strong. <a href="chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-19-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-19-3">He was the son of Uni the Unborn, Gardar’s son who found Iceland. Arnguda’s son was Hamond the Halt, who dwelt at Hamondstede. <a href="chapter-19.xhtml#noteref-19-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-20-1">She was the daughter of Lord Ar the Silent. She had come out hither to Iceland from Norway, and taken land to the west of Markfleet, between Auldastone and Selialandsmull. Her son was Holt-Thorir, the father of Thorleif Crow, from whom the Wood-dwellers are sprung, and of Thorgrim the Tall, and Skorargeir. <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-20-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-20-2">This means that Njal was one of those gifted beings who, according to the firm belief of that age, had a more than human insight into things about to happen. It answers very nearly to the Scottish ” second sight.” <a href="chapter-20.xhtml#noteref-20-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-23-1">“Lord of rings,” a periphrasis for a chief, that is, Mord. <a href="chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-23-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-23-2">“Earth’s offspring,” a periphrasis for woman, that is, Unna. <a href="chapter-23.xhtml#noteref-23-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-25-1">The son of Ranveig the Silly, the son of Valgard, the son of Aefar, the son of Vemund Wordstopper, the son of Thorolf Hooknose, the son of Thrand the Old, the son of Harold Hilditann, the son of Hraereck Ringscatterer. The mother of Harold Hilditann, was Aud the daughter of Ivar Widefathom, the son of Halfdan the Clever. The brother of Valgard the Guileful was Wolf Aurpriest⁠—from whom the Pointdwellers sprung⁠—Wolf Aurpriest was the father of Swart, the father of Lodmund, the father of Sigfus, the father of Saemund the Wise. But from Valgard is sprung Kolbein the Young. <a href="chapter-25.xhtml#noteref-25-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-26-1">Ellidagrim was Asgrim’s son, Aundot the Crow’s son. His mother’s name was Jorunn, and she was the daughter of Teit, the son of Kettlebjörn the Old of Mossfell. The mother of Teit was Helga, daughter of Thord Skeggi’s son, Hrapp’s son, Bjorn’s son the Roughfooted, Grim’s son, the Lord of Sogn in Norway. The mother of Jorunn was Olof Harvest-heal, daughter of Bodvar, Viking-Kari’s son. <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-26-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-26-2">His daughter was Thorgerda, mother of Sigfus, the father of Saemund the Learned. <a href="chapter-26.xhtml#noteref-26-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-28-1">“Oyce,” a north country word for the mouth of a river, from the Icelandic. <a href="chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-28-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-28-2">“The Bay” (comp. ch. ii., and other passages), the name given to the great bay in the east of Norway, the entrance of which from the North Sea is the Cattegat, and at the end of which is the Christiania Firth. The name also applies to the land round the Bay, which thus formed a district, the boundary of which, on the one side, was the promontory called Lindesnæs, or the Naze, and on the other, the Gota-Elf, the river on which the Swedish town of Gottenburg stands, and off the mouth of which lies the island of Hisingen, mentioned shortly after. <a href="chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-28-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-28-3">Easterling, i.e., the Norseman Hallvard. <a href="chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-28-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-28-4">Permia, the country one comes to after doubling the North Cape. <a href="chapter-28.xhtml#noteref-28-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-29-1">A town at the mouth of the Christiania Firth. It was a great place for traffic in early times, and was long the only mart in the south-east of Norway. <a href="chapter-29.xhtml#noteref-29-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-30-1">Rill of wolf⁠—stream of blood. <a href="chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-30-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-30-2">A province of Sweden. <a href="chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-30-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-30-3">An island in the Baltic, off the coast of Esthonia. <a href="chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-30-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-30-4">“Endil’s courser”⁠—periphrasis for a ship. <a href="chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-30-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-30-5">“Sigar’s storm”⁠—periphrasis for a sea-fight. <a href="chapter-30.xhtml#noteref-30-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-36-1">Grieve, i.e., bailiff, head workman. <a href="chapter-36.xhtml#noteref-36-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-44-1">“Swanbath’s beams”⁠—periphrasis for gold. <a href="chapter-44.xhtml#noteref-44-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-45-1">“Thou, that heapest boards,” etc.⁠—merely a periphrasis for man, and scarcely fitting, except in irony, to a splitter of firewood. <a href="chapter-45.xhtml#noteref-45-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-46-1">Teit’s mother’s name was Helga. She was a daughter of Thord Longbeard, who was the son of Hrapp, who was the son of Bjorn the Rough-footed, who was the son of Grim, the Lord of Sogn in Norway. Gizur’s mother’s name was Olof. She was a daughter of Lord Baudvar, Viking-Kari’s son. <a href="chapter-46.xhtml#noteref-46-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-47-1">That is, slew him in a duel. <a href="chapter-47.xhtml#noteref-47-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-47-2">Mord Valgard’s son lived at the other farm called Hof. <a href="chapter-47.xhtml#noteref-47-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-48-1">That is, from the sea-side or shore, the long narrow strip of habitable land between the mountains and the sea in the south-east of Iceland. <a href="chapter-48.xhtml#noteref-48-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-54-1">This shews that the shields were oblong, running down to a point. <a href="chapter-54.xhtml#noteref-54-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-56-1">Thorod’s mother was Thorvor, she was daughter of Thormod Skapti’s son, son of Oleif the Broad, son of Oliver Barncarle. <a href="chapter-56.xhtml#noteref-56-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-57-1">She was daughter of Hroald the Red and Hildigunna Thorstein Titling’s daughter. The mother of Hildigunna was Aud Eyvind Karf’s daughter, the sister of Modolf the Wise of Mosfell, from whom the Modylfings are sprung. <a href="chapter-57.xhtml#noteref-57-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-62-1">“Rhine’s fire,” a periphrasis for gold. <a href="chapter-62.xhtml#noteref-62-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-71-1">“Water-skates,” a periphrasis for ships. <a href="chapter-71.xhtml#noteref-71-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-74-1">“Great Rift,” Almannagja⁠—The great volcanic rift, or ” geo,” as it would be called in Orkney and Shetland, which bounds the plain of the Allthing on one side. <a href="chapter-74.xhtml#noteref-74-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-76-1">Thorgrim Easterling and Thorbrand. <a href="chapter-76.xhtml#noteref-76-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-76-2">“Frodi’s flour,” a periphrasis for ” gold.” <a href="chapter-76.xhtml#noteref-76-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-76-3">“Sea’s bright sunbeams,” a periphrasis for ” gold.” <a href="chapter-76.xhtml#noteref-76-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-76-4">She was a sister of Thorwald the Scurvy, who was slain at Horsebeck in Grimsness. <a href="chapter-76.xhtml#noteref-76-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-80-1">Constantinople. <a href="chapter-80.xhtml#noteref-80-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-81-1">Hlada or Lada, and sometimes in the plural Ladir, was the old capital of Drontheim, before Nidaros⁠—the present Drontheim⁠—was founded. Drontheim was originally the name of the country round the firth of the same name, and is not used in the old sagas for a town. <a href="chapter-81.xhtml#noteref-81-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-81-2">The country round the Christiania Firth, at the top of ” the Bay.” <a href="chapter-81.xhtml#noteref-81-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-81-3">A town in Sweden on the Gota-Elf. <a href="chapter-81.xhtml#noteref-81-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-84-1">The mainland of Orkney, now Pomona. <a href="chapter-84.xhtml#noteref-84-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-84-2">Now Stroma, in the Pentland Firth. <a href="chapter-84.xhtml#noteref-84-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-90-1">“Prop of sea-waves’ fire,” a periphrasis for woman that bears gold on her arm. <a href="chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-90-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-90-2">“Skates that skim.” etc.. a periphrasis for ships. <a href="chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-90-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-90-3">“Odin’s mocking cup,” mocking songs. <a href="chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-90-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-90-4">An allusion to the Beast Epic, where the cunning fox laughs at the flayed condition of his stupid foes, the wolf and bear. We should say, “Don’t stop to speak with him, but rather beat him black and blue.” <a href="chapter-90.xhtml#noteref-90-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-91-1">“Sea-stag,” periphrasis for ship. <a href="chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-91-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-91-2">“Sea-fire bearers,” the bearers of gold, men, that is, Helgi and Grim. <a href="chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-91-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-91-3">“Byrnie-breacher,” piercer of coats of mail. <a href="chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-91-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-91-4">“Noisy ogre’s namesake,” an allusion to the name of Skarp hedinn’s axe, ” the ogress of war.” <a href="chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-91-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-91-5">Twelve ells, about twenty-four feet (the Norse ell being something more than two feet), a good jump, but not beyond the power of man. Comp. “Orkn. Saga”, ch. 113, new ed., vol. i., 457, where Earl Harold leaps nine ells over a dike. <a href="chapter-91.xhtml#noteref-91-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-94-1">Thord was the son of Auzur, the son of Asbjorn Eyjangr the son of Bjorn, the son of Helgi, the son of Bjorn the Roughfooted, the son of Grim, the Lord of Sogn. The mother of Flosi was Ingunna, daughter of Thorir of Espihole, the son of Hamond Hellskin, the son of Hjor, the son of Half, who ruled over the men of Half, the son of Hjorleif, the lover of women. The mother of Thorir was Ingunna, daughter of Helgi the Lean, who took the land round Eyjafirth, as the first settler. <a href="chapter-94.xhtml#noteref-94-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-94-2">The mother of Starkad was Thraslauga, daughter of Thorstein titling the son of Gerleif; but the mother of Thraslauga was Aud; she was a daughter of Eyvind Karf, one of the first settlers, and sister of Modolf the Wise. <a href="chapter-94.xhtml#noteref-94-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-95-1">Hall’s mother’s name was Thordisa, and she was a daughter of Auzur, the son of Hrodlaug, the son of Earl Rognvald of Maeren, the son of Eystein the Noisy. <a href="chapter-95.xhtml#noteref-95-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-95-2">Thidrandi was the son of Kettle Rumble, the son of Thorir, the son of Thidrandi of Verudale. The brothers of Thidrandi were Kettle Rumble, in Njordwick, and Thorwald, the father of Helgi Droplaug’s son. Hallkatla was the sister of Joreida. She was the mother of Thorkel Geiti’s son, and Thidrandi. <a href="chapter-95.xhtml#noteref-95-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-96-1">He was the son of Ari, the son of Mar, the son of Atli, the son of Wolf Squinteye, the son of Hogni the White, the son of Otryg, the son of Oblaud, the son of Hjorleif the lover of women, King of Hordaland. <a href="chapter-96.xhtml#noteref-96-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-97-1">Rood-cross, a crucifix. <a href="chapter-97.xhtml#noteref-97-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-97-2">His son was Glum who fared to the burning with Flosi. <a href="chapter-97.xhtml#noteref-97-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-1">“Forge which foams with song,” the poet’s head, in which songs are forged, and gush forth like foaming mead. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-2">“Hero’s helm-prop,” the hero’s, man’s, head which supports his helm. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-3">It is needless to say that this Hall was not Hall of the Side. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-4">“Wolf of Gods,” the ” caput lupinum,” the outlaw of heaven, the outcast from Valhalla, Thangbrand. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-5">“The other wolf,” Gudleif. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-5" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-6">“Swarthy skarf,” the skarf, or ” pelecanus carbo”, the cormorant. He compares the message of Thorwald to the cormorant skimming over the waves, and says he will never take it. “Snap at flies,” a very common Icelandic metaphor from fish rising to a fly. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-6" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-7">Maurer thinks the allusion is here to some mythological legend on Odin’s adventures which has not come down to us. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-7" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-8">“He that giant’s,” etc., Thor. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-8" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-9">“Mew-field’s bison,” the sea-going ship, which sails over the plain of the sea-mew. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-9" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-10">“Bell’s warder,” the Christian priest whose bell-ringing formed part of the rites of the new faith. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-10" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-11">“Falcon of the strand,” ship. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-11" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-12">“Courser of the causeway,” ship. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-12" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-13">“Gylfi’s hart,” ship. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-13" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-98-14">“Viking’s snow-shoe,” sea-king’s ship. <a href="chapter-98.xhtml#noteref-98-14" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-100-1">“Boiling kettle.” This was a hver, or hot spring. <a href="chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-100-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-100-2">This was the “Raven’s Rift,” opposite to the “Great Rift” on the other side of Thingfield. <a href="chapter-100.xhtml#noteref-100-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-101-1">Kettle and Thorkel were both sons of Thorir Tag, the son of Kettle the Seal, the son of Ornolf, the son of Bjornolf, the son of Grim Hairycheek, the son of Kettle Haeing, the son of Hallbjorn Halftroll of Ravensfood. <a href="chapter-101.xhtml#noteref-101-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-101-2">This was no bribe, but his lawful fee. <a href="chapter-101.xhtml#noteref-101-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-103-1">Mideven, six o’clock <abbr epub:type="z3998:initialism">p.</abbr>m. <a href="chapter-103.xhtml#noteref-103-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-103-2">“Warrior’s temper,” the temper of Hauskuld of Whiteness. <a href="chapter-103.xhtml#noteref-103-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-103-3">“Snake-land’s stem,” a periphrasis for woman, Rodny. <a href="chapter-103.xhtml#noteref-103-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-103-4">“He that hoardeth ocean’s fire,” a periphrasis for man, Hauskuld of Whiteness. <a href="chapter-103.xhtml#noteref-103-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-112-1">Einar was the son of Audun the Bald, the son of Thorolf Butter, the son of Thorstein the Unstable, the son of Grim with the Tuft. The mother of Gudmund was Hallberg, the daughter of Thorodd Helm, but the mother of Hallbera was Reginleifa, daughter of Saemund the South-islander; after him is named Saemundslithe in Skagafirth. The mother of Eyjolf, Gudmund’s father, was Valgerda Runolf’s daughter; the mother of Valgerda was Valbjorg, her mother was Joruna the Disowned, a daughter of King Oswald the Saint. The mother of Einar, the father of Eyjolf, was Helga, a daughter of Helgi the Lean, who took Eyjafirth as the first settler. Helgi was the son of Eyvind the Easterling. The mother of Helgi was Raforta, the daughter of Kjarval, the Erse King. The mother of Helga Helgi’s daughter, was Thoruna the Horned, daughter of Kettle Flatnose, the son of Bjorn the Rough-footed, the son of Grim, Lord of Sogn. The mother of Grim was Hervora, but the mother of Hervora was Thorgerda, daughter of King Haleyg of Helgeland. Thorlauga was the name of Gudmund the Powerful’s wife, she was a daughter of Atli the Strong, the son of Eilif the Eagle, the son of Bard, the son of Jalkettle, the son of Ref, the son of Skidi the Old. Herdisa was the name of Thorlauga’s mother, a daughter of Thord of the Head, the son of Bjorn Butter-carrier, the son of Hroald the son of Hrodlaug the Sad, the son of Bjorn Ironside, the son of Ragnar Hairybreeks, the son of Sigurd Ring, the son of Randver, the son of Radbard. The mother of Herdisa Thord’s daughter was Thorgerda Skidi’s daughter, her mother was Fridgerda, a daughter of Kjarval, the Erse King. <a href="chapter-112.xhtml#noteref-112-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-113-1">Thorstein Codcatcher was the son of Thorolf Mostrarskegg, the son of Ornolf Fish-driver, but Ari the Wise says he was the son of Thorgil Reydarside. Thorolf Mostrarskegg had to wife Oska, the daughter of Thorstein the Red. The mother of Thorgrim was named Thora, a daughter of Oleif the Shy, the son of Thorstein the Red, the son of Oleif the White, the son of Ingialld, the son of Helgi; but the mother of Ingialld was Thora, a daughter of Sigurd Snake-eye, son of Ragnar Hairybreeks; but the mother of Snorri the Priest was Thordisa, the daughter of Sur, and the sister of Gisli. <a href="chapter-113.xhtml#noteref-113-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-115-1">They were children of Hauskuld the White, the son of Ingialld the Strong, the son of Gerfinn the Red, the son of Solvi, the son of Thorstein Baresarks-bane. <a href="chapter-115.xhtml#noteref-115-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-115-2">The mother of Egil was Thraslauga, the daughter of Thorstein Titling; the mother of Thraslauga was Unna, the daughter of Eyvind Karf. <a href="chapter-115.xhtml#noteref-115-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-118-1">Hafr was the son of Thorkel, the son of Eric of Gooddale, the son of Geirmund, the son of Hroald, the son of Eric Frizzlebeard who felled Gritgarth in Soknardale in Norway. <a href="chapter-118.xhtml#noteref-118-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-118-2">Thorkel was the son of Thorgeir the Priest, the son of Tjorfi, the son of Thorkel the Long; but the mother of Thorgeir was Thoruna, the daughter of Thorstein, the son of Sigmund, son of Bard of the Nip. The mother of Thorkel Foulmouth was named Gudrida; she was a daughter of Thorkel the Black of Hleidrargarth, the son of Thorir Tag, the son of Kettle the Seal, the son of Ornolf, the son of Bjornolf, the son of Grim Hairy-cheek, the son of Kettle Haeing, the son of Hallbjorn Halftroll. <a href="chapter-118.xhtml#noteref-118-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-118-3">“Baltic side.” This probably means a part of the Finnish coast in the Gulf of Bothnia. See “Fornm. Sogur”, xii. 264⁠–⁠5. <a href="chapter-118.xhtml#noteref-118-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-118-4">“Wild man of the woods.” In the original Finngalkn, a fabulous monster, half man and half beast. <a href="chapter-118.xhtml#noteref-118-4" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-121-1">The true English word for ” arbitrator,” or ” umpire.” See “Job” ix. 33⁠—“Neither is there any daysman betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us both.” See also Holland’s “Translations of Livy”, Page 137⁠—“A more shameful precedent for the time to come: namely, that umpires and dates-men should convert the thing in suit unto their own and proper vantage.” <a href="chapter-121.xhtml#noteref-121-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-125-1">“Sand,” Skeidara sand. <a href="chapter-125.xhtml#noteref-125-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-125-2">“Sand,” Maelifell’s sand. <a href="chapter-125.xhtml#noteref-125-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-125-3">“Nones,” the well-known canonical hour of the day, the ninth hour from six a.m., that is, about three o’clock when one of the church services took place. <a href="chapter-125.xhtml#noteref-125-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-127-1">The Icelandic word is ” heimsokn,” a term which still lingers in the grave offence known in Scottish law as ” hamesucken.” <a href="chapter-127.xhtml#noteref-127-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-129-1">“Son of Gollnir,” Njal, who was the son of Thorgeir Gelling or Gollnir. <a href="chapter-129.xhtml#noteref-129-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-129-2">“My friends,” ironically of course. <a href="chapter-129.xhtml#noteref-129-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-133-1">Broddhelgi was the son of Thorgil, the son of Thorstein the White, the son of Oliver, the son of Eyvalld, the son of Oxen-Thorir. The mother of Bjarni was Halla, the daughter of Lyting. The mother of Broddhelgi was Asvora, the daughter of Thorir, the son of Porridge-Atli, the son of Thorir Thidrandi. Bjarni Broddhelgi’s son had to wife Rannveiga the daughter of Thorgeir, the son of Eric of Gooddale, the son of Geirmund, the son of Hroald, the son of Eric Frizzelbeard. <a href="chapter-133.xhtml#noteref-133-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-134-1">“Helmet-hewer,” sword. <a href="chapter-134.xhtml#noteref-134-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-134-2">Gizur. <a href="chapter-134.xhtml#noteref-134-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-137-1">Eyjolf the Guileful was the son of Thord Gellir, the son of Oleif Feilan. The mother of Eyjolf the Guileful was Rodny, the daughter of Skeggi of Midfirth. <a href="chapter-137.xhtml#noteref-137-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-141-1">John for a man, and Gudruna for a woman, were standing names in the Formularies of the Icelandic code, answering to the “M or N” in our Liturgy, or to those famous fictions of English law, “John Doe and Richard Roe.” <a href="chapter-141.xhtml#noteref-141-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-141-2">“Gossipry,” that is, because they were gossips, “God’s sib”, relations by baptism. <a href="chapter-141.xhtml#noteref-141-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-143-1">An old English law term for asylum or sanctuary. <a href="chapter-143.xhtml#noteref-143-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-144-1">“Swinestye,” ironically for Swinefell, where Flosi lived. <a href="chapter-144.xhtml#noteref-144-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-144-2">This is the English equivalent for the Icelandic Hrep, a district. It still lingers in ” the Rape of Bramber,” and other districts in Sussex and the southeast. <a href="chapter-144.xhtml#noteref-144-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-145-1">“With words alone.” The English proverb, “Threatened men live long.” <a href="chapter-145.xhtml#noteref-145-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-145-2">“Sea crags.” Hence Thorgeir got his surname “Craggeir.” <a href="chapter-145.xhtml#noteref-145-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-146-1">“Pilgrimage to Rome.” This condition had not been mentioned before. <a href="chapter-146.xhtml#noteref-146-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-156-1">“Shieldburg,” that is, a ring of men holding their shields locked together. <a href="chapter-156.xhtml#noteref-156-1" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-156-2">“Thy dog,” etc. Meaning that he would go a third time on a pilgrimage to Rome if St. Peter helped him out of this strait. <a href="chapter-156.xhtml#noteref-156-2" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
			<p id="note-156-3">“Helmgnawer,” the sword that bites helmets. <a href="chapter-156.xhtml#noteref-156-3" epub:type="backlink">↩</a></p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
