<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Preface</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="frontmatter">
		<section id="preface" epub:type="z3998:preface">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Preface</h2>
			<p>WHAT is a Saga? A Saga is a story, or telling in prose, sometimes mixed with verse. There are many kinds of Sagas, of all degrees of truth. There are the mythical Sagas, in which the wondrous deeds of heroes of old time, half gods and half men, as Sigurd and Ragnar, are told as they were handed down from father to son in the traditions of the Northern race. Then there are Sagas recounting the history of the kings of Norway and other countries, of the great line of Orkney Jarls, and of the chiefs who ruled in Faroe. These are all more or less trustworthy, and, in general, far worthier of belief than much that passes for the early history of other races. Again, there are Sagas relating to Iceland, narrating the lives, and feuds, and ends of mighty chiefs, the heads of the great families which dwelt in this or that district of the island. These were told by men who lived on the very spot, and told with a minuteness and exactness, as to time and place, that will bear the strictest examination. Such a Saga is that of Njal, which we now lay before our readers in an English garb. Of all the Sagas relating to Iceland, this tragic story bears away the palm for truthfulness and beauty. To use the words of one well qualified to judge, it is, as compared with all similar compositions, as gold to brass.<a id="noteref-preface-1" href="#note-preface-1" epub:type="noteref"><sup>1</sup></a> Like all the Sagas which relate to the same period of Icelandic story, Njala<a id="noteref-preface-2" href="#note-preface-2" epub:type="noteref"><sup>2</sup></a> was not written down till about 100 years after the events which are described in it had happened. In the meantime, it was handed down by word of mouth, told from Althing to Althing, at Spring Thing, and Autumn Leet, at all great gatherings of the people, and over many a fireside, on sea strand or river bank, or up among the dales and hills, by men who had learnt the sad story of Njal's fate, and who could tell of Gunnar's peerlessness and Hallgerd a's infamy, of Bergthora's helpfulness, of Skarphedinn's hastiness, of Flo si's foul deed, and Kari's stern revenge. We may be sure that as soon as each event recorded in the Saga occurred, it was told and talked about as matter of history, and when at last the whole story was unfolded and took shape, and centred round Njal, that it was handed down from father to son, as truthfully and faithfully as could ever be the case with any public or notorious matter in local history. But it is not on Njala alone that we have to rely for our evidence of its genuineness. There are many other Sagas relating to the same period, and handed down in like manner, in which the actors in our Saga are incidentally mentioned by name, and in which the deeds recorded of them are corroborated. They are mentioned also in songs and Annals, the latter being the earliest written records which belong to the history of the island, while the former were more easily remembered, from the construction of the verse. Much passes for history in other lands on far slighter grounds, and many a story in Thucydides or Tacitus, or even in Clarendon or Hume, is believed on evidence not onetenth part so trustworthy as that which supports the narratives of these Icelandic story-tellers of the eleventh century. That with occurrences of undoubted truth, and minute particularity as to time and place, as to dates and distance, are intermingled wild superstitions on several occasions, will startle no reader of the smallest judgment. All ages, our own not excepted, have their superstitions, and to suppose that a story told in the eleventh century,—when phantoms, and ghosts, and wraiths, were implicitly believed in, and when dreams, and warnings, and tokens, were part of every man's creed,—should be wanting in these marks of genuineness, is simply to require that one great proof of its truthfulness should be wanting, and that, in order to suit the spirit of our age, it should lack something which was part and parcel of popular belief in the age to which it belonged. To a thoughtful mind, therefore, such stories as that of Swan's witchcraft, Gunnar's song in his cairn, the Wolf's ride before the Burning, Flo si's dream, the signs and tokens before Brian's battle, and even Njal's weird foresight, on which the whole story hangs, will be regarded as proofs rather for than against its genuineness.<a id="noteref-preface-3" href="#note-preface-3" epub:type="noteref"><sup>3</sup></a> But it is an old saying, that a story never loses in telling, and so we may expect it must have been with this story. For the facts which the Saga-teller related he was bound to follow the narrations of those who had gone before him, and if he swerved to or fro in this respect, public opinion and notorious fame was there to check and contradict him.<a id="noteref-preface-4" href="#note-preface-4" epub:type="noteref"><sup>4</sup></a> But the way in which he told the facts was his own, and thus it comes that some Sagas are better told than others, as the feeling and power of the narrator were above those of others. To tell a story truthfully, was what was looked for from all men in those days; but to tell it properly and gracefully, and so to clothe the facts in fitting diction, was given to few, and of those few the Saga teller who first threw Njala into its present shape, was one of the first and foremost.</p>
			<p>With the change of faith and conversion of the Icelanders to Christianity, writing, and the materials for writing, first came into the land, about the year 1000. There is no proof that the earlier or Runic alphabet, which existed in heathen times, was ever used for any other purposes than those of simple monumental inscriptions, or of short legends on weapons or sacrificial vessels, or horns and drinking cups. But with the Roman alphabet came not only a readier means of expressing thought, but also a class of men who were wont thus to express themselves. While the open nature of the North man’s life called upon him for words rather than writing, and even in trials, rather for oral than written testimony; while the heathen priest’s memory was burdened with a few solemn forms of oaths taken in the temples, and some short prayers and toasts recited and uttered at sacrifices and feasts, the Christian monk, with his mass book and ritual, was thrown, by the very nature of his services, and by solitude of his cell, into fellowship with letters, and taught to express himself by writing rather than by speech. Thus, during the whole of the eleventh century, two separate systems of teaching existed in Iceland. Oral teaching, as regarded the traditions and history of the country by the mouths of the Saga-tellers; and written teaching in the services performed on Sundays and Saints' days by the Christian ecclesiastics—the one speaking and the other reading what they wished the community to learn. Under this system we shall not be surprised to hear that the earliest fragments of MSS. which have come down to us from that century are portions of ecclesiastical legends and lives of Saints, which the clergy had composed in the Icelandic language for the edification of their flocks. About the beginning of the twelfth century, what may be termed a national love of letters arose in Iceland, and the Roman character, hitherto employed only as the vehicle for priestly instruction, was extended to a wider field. The poetical literature of the north was collected into one volume by Saemund the learned, who died in the year 1133. Then, too, it was that the attention of Ari the learned (born 1067, died 1148) was turned towards employing Roman writing with a view towards preserving by means of that alphabet the history of his forefathers. Thus it was that the first sketch and outline arose of what we now know as Landnáma, a volume that contains the account of the colonization of the island. The first step taken, others soon followed in Ari's footsteps. Saga after Saga was reduced to writing, and before the year 1200 it is reckoned that all the pieces of that kind of composition which relate to the history of Icelanders previous to the introduction of Christianity had passed from the oral into the written shape.<a id="noteref-preface-5" href="#note-preface-5" epub:type="noteref"><sup>5</sup></a> Of all those Sagas, none were so interesting as Njal, whether as regarded the length of the story, the number and rank of the chiefs who appeared in it as actors, and the graphic way in which the tragic tale was told. As a rounded whole, in which each part is finely and beautifully polished, in which the two great divisions of the story are kept in perfect balance and counter poise, in which each person who appears is left free to speak in a way which stamps him with a character of his own, while all unite in working towards a common end, no Saga had such claims on public attention as Njala, and it is certain none would sooner have been committed to writing. The latest period, therefore, that we can assign as the date at which our Saga was moulded into its present shape is the year 1200. The perfect MSS. which exist are indeed of the thirteenth century, but there are fragments still existing of others of an earlier date. When we reflect that not only Njala was reduced to writing at that period, but very many other Sagas also, some of which have perished, though a great mass of them still remain, we shall be astonished at the industry displayed by the Icelandic scribes of the twelfth century, and we may fairly challenge any other nation of Europe in that century to show a like store of vernacular literature.<a id="noteref-preface-6" href="#note-preface-6" epub:type="noteref"><sup>6</sup></a> The way in which the Saga throws light on the customs and manners of the Icelanders, and in which those customs and manners in their turn illustrate the Saga, have been worked out in the Introduction and Appendix, not by any means as fully as the subject deserves, but sufficiently so to guide the reader who may wish to obtain some knowledge of a strange state of society along what he would otherwise find a dark some path. In this place it will suffice if we say something of the translation itself. It has been purposely made as literal as the idioms of the two languages would permit. In the renderings of the songs indeed a little more licence has been taken, but even these will be found by any one who is able to compare them with the original to be very faithful.<a id="noteref-preface-7" href="#note-preface-7" epub:type="noteref"><sup>7</sup></a> The duty of a translator is not to shape; the only pity is that so few of them did so; and thus it is that we know, surely, neither who composed such and such a Saga, nor when it was thrown into its present shape. I only wish that Icelanders had begun, like Herodotus and Thucydides, by writing their names on the first line of their book, and so given it out that they were its authors. Then, perhaps, other peoples would not have wrongfully taken their works to themselves.” convey the sense of his original in such a way that the idioms and wording of one tongue are sacrificed to those of the other, but to find out the words and idioms of his own language which answer most fully and fairly to those of the language from which he is translating, and so to make the one as perfect a reflection as is possible of the forms and thoughts of the other. From such a point of view a translation becomes a labour of love indeed, but it is also a work of time and toil. It was in the year 1843 that the translator first made up his mind to turn Njala into English, and a considerable portion of the Saga was rendering, will be found in the maps. The surnames and nicknames have also been turned into English, an attempt which has not a little increased the toil of translation. Great allowance must be made for these renderings, as those nicknames often arose out of circumstances of which we know little or nothing. Of some, such as “Thorgeir Craggeir,” and “Thorkel foulmouth,” the Saga itself explains the origin. In a state of society where so many men bore the same name, any circumstance or event in a man’s life, as well as any peculiarity in form or feature, or in temper and turn of mind, gave rise to a surname or nickname, which clung to him through life as a distinguishing mark. The Post Office in the United States is said to give persons in the same district, with similar names, an initial of identification, which answers the same purpose as the Icelandic nickname, thus:—“John P Smith,”—“John Q Smith.” As a general rule the translator has withstood the temptation to use old English words. “Busk” and “boun” he pleads guilty to, because both still linger in the language understood by few. “Busk” is a reflective formed from “at búa actually translated in that year. But it was soon found that there are some things which, begun in youth, must wait for their completion till middle age; and though the work has never been wholly laid aside, it has been translated and retranslated, in some cases many times over, in the intervening space. Even now, after all that has been done to make the rendering faithful, the translator lays it with dread before the public, not because he has any doubt as to the beauty of his original, but because he is in despair, lest any shortcomings of his own should mar the noble features of the masterpiece which it has been his care to copy. Indeed, on looking back over the years that have elapsed between the conception of the design and its fulfilment, the writer is more and more astonished at his own rashsik” “to get oneself ready,” and “boun” is the past participle of the active form “búa, búinn,” to get ready. When the leader in Old Ballads says—“Busk ye, busk ye, My bonny, bonny, men,” He calls on his followers to equip themselves; when they are thus equipped they are “boun.” A bride “busks” herself for the bridal; when she is dressed she is “boun.” In old times a ship was “busked” for a voyage; when she was fitted and ready for sea she was “boun”—whence come our outward “bound” and homeward “bound.” These with “redes” for counsels or plans are almost the only words in the translation which are not still in every-day use.</p>
			<p class="continued">ness in proposing to undertake such a task, with the means then at his command. There was a printed text indeed, but one very full of literal errors. There was no dictionary of the language, and no reliable work on the Law, which fills so large a part of the Saga. Since 1843, matters have happily changed, in some of these respects; the text still remains the same text, carelessly printed from good MSS.; and a new edition, announced as forthcoming for several years, still remains to come forth. But the dictionary of the language, the materials for which were collected with so much toil and skill for many years by the lamented Richard Cleasby, who died just as he was reducing them to shape—that dictionary which was hastily finished after his death by the generosity of his family, which was transferred by them to the translator for publication in England, and which will be published as soon as it is in a fit state to be laid before the world, has been the greatest help in the translation. In many of the darkest mysteries of the law, the critical genius of Maurer has held out a safe and certain guide, and though last, not least, the constant intercourse and communication which the translator has maintained with Icelandic scholars, of whom it may be here permitted to name his old friend Grímur Thomsen, and his new friend Guðbrandr Vigfússon, have enabled him to throw light on many points of Icelandic topography, as well as on the life, law, and customs of the early Icelanders. Much undoubtedly still remains to be done, even by Icelanders themselves, for the early history of their country. There are many customs still to be explained, many riddles of social life solved, many knotty points of law unravelled, but so far as knowledge on any point was to be obtained the translator has sought for it, and if it were not to be found, at least done his best to find it. In conclusion, this preface must not end without a word of acknowledgment as to the help which the translator has received from the publishers of the work, Messrs. Edmonston and Douglas, who have spared no expense or pains to lay Njal before the world in a beautiful and becoming shape. In addition to this, the index, a work of no little toil, has been entirely prepared and arranged by Mr. Douglas, and it may safely be said, whether the translation, as a translation, be good or bad, no work has seen the light of late years in this country with a better index. The maps and plans have been engraved with great care and skill by Mr. Bartholomew; the first from the excellent map of Iceland based on the trigonometrical survey undertaken by the Danish government; the last, so far as the old Icelandic Hall is concerned, from the beautiful designs of Sigurðr Guðmundson, artist of Reykjavík, who is a living proof that the skill of hand which adorned the Hall at Hjarðarholt in the tenth century, still exists in Iceland at the present day, and whose thorough knowledge of the Sagas has enabled him to restore the dwellings of his forefathers. The plans of the Thingfield are chiefly from a sketch kindly furnished by Captain Forbes, R. N., whose book on Iceland only makes the reader wish that the author had spent more time on the island. Mr. Metcalfe, B. D., who spent some months in Iceland during the present year, has furnished some valuable topographical information. The sketch for the cover is from the hand of Mr. James Drummond, R. S.A., who has combined the chief weapons mentioned in our Saga, Gunnar's bill, Skarphedinn's axe, and Kari's sword, all bound together with one of the great silver rings found in some Viking's hoard in Orkney, into a most beautiful design. To each and all of these the translator wishes to return his best thanks for that ready help which now enables him to send Njal out into the world with a smiling face.<a id="noteref-preface-8" href="#note-preface-8" epub:type="noteref"><sup>8</sup></a></p>
			<p>It was a foster-father’s duty, in old times, to rear and cherish the child which he had taken from the arms of its natural parents, his superiors in rank. And so may this work, which the translator has taken from the house of Icelandic scholars, his masters in knowledge, and which he has reared and fostered so many years under an English roof, go forth and fight the battle of life for itself, and win fresh fame for those who gave it birth. It will be reward enough for him who has first clothed it in an English dress if his foster-child adds another leaf to that evergreen wreath of glory which crowns the brows of Iceland’s ancient worthies.</p>
			<p>Christmas Eve, 1860.</p>
			<p>Skinnbókum, með Konunglegu leyfi, ok prentuð í Kaupmannahaufn Árið 1772 af Johann Rúdolph Thiele.” “The Saga of Njál Thorgeir’s son and his sons, etcra. edited from old MS. with Royal licence, and printed in Copenhagen in the year 1772 by John Rudolph Thiele.” In the year 1809 appeared “Njál’s Saga. Historia Njali et Filiorum Latine reddita, cum adjectâ chronologiâ, variis textus Islandici lectionibus, earumque crisi, nec non glossario et indice rerum et locorum. Sumtibus Petri Friderici Suhmii et Legati Arna-Magnæani. Havniæ Anno M. D.CCCIX. Lit eris Typographi Johannis Rudolphi Thiele.” The various readings, the notes, and the versions of the songs in this Latin translation, are particularly good, but the new edition of the Icelandic text, so long promised by Konrad Gíslason, is much needed.</p>
			<hr/>
			<section id="preface-endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
				<h3 epub:type="title">Notes</h3>
				<p id="note-preface-1"><a href="#noteref-preface-1">1</a> Guðbrandr Vigfússon.</p>
				<p id="note-preface-2"><a href="#noteref-preface-2">2</a> This word is invented like Laxdæla, Gretla, and others, to escape the repetition of the word Saga, after that of the person or place to which the story belongs. It combines the idea of the subject and the telling in one word.</p>
				<p id="note-preface-3"><a href="#noteref-preface-3">3</a> Many particulars mentioned in the Saga as wonderful are no wonders to us. Thus in the case of Gunnar's bill, when we are told that it gave out a strange sound before great events, this probably only means that the shaft on which it was mounted was of some hard ringing wood unknown in the north. It was a foreign weapon, and if the shaft were of lance wood, the sounds it gave out when brandished or shaken would be accounted for at once without a miracle.</p>
				<p id="note-preface-4"><a href="#noteref-preface-4">4</a> There can be no doubt that it was considered a grave offence to public morality to tell a Saga untruthfully. Respect to friends and enemies alike, when they were dead and gone, demanded that the histories of their lives, and especially of their last moments, should be told as the events had actually happened. Our own Saga affords a good illustration of this, and shows at the same time how a Saga naturally arose out of great events. When King Sigtrygg was Earl Sigurd's guest at Yule, and Flosi and the other Burners were about the Earl's court, the Irish king wished to hear the story of the Burning, and Gunnar Lambi's son was put forward to tell it at the feast on Christmas day. It only added to Kari's grudge against him to hear Gunnar tell the story with such a false leaning, when he gave it out that Skarphedinn had wept for fear of the fire, and the vengeance which so speedily overtook the false teller was looked upon as just retribution. But when Flosi took up the story, he told it fairly and justly for both sides, "and therefore," says the Saga, "what he said was believed."</p>
				<p id="note-preface-5"><a href="#noteref-preface-5">5</a> It is positively stated in Sturlúnga, I. 107, that all the Sagas of that date were written down before the death of Bishop Brandr, who died in the year 1201. Compare Guðbrandr Vigfússon, Safn til Sög. Isl., II. 190, where, by a misprint, the reference to Sturlúnga is wrongly given as II. 17. It should either be by vol. and page, I. 107, as above, or by part and chapter, ii. 38. As the passage is very important, it is worth while to correct the misprint.</p>
				<p id="note-preface-6"><a href="#noteref-preface-6">6</a> The following very sensible remarks are translated from the Icelandic Preface to Egils Saga Reykjavík, 1856:—" We may say the same of this, as of all the best Sagas relating to Iceland, that their authors never wilfully tell untruths; they write down the Saga just as it had taken shape, little by little, and just as they believe that all had happened. Where, for instance, the strength or daring of any man are plainly overdrawn, the reason of this is, not that the authors had any wish to exaggerate on those points, but rather because they had heard the story told so, and had made up their minds that so it must have been. The same may be said of the superstitions and contradictions which occur in the Sagas. They show no wilful purpose to tell untruths, but simply are proofs of the beliefs and turn of thought of men in the age when the Sagas were reduced to writing. But though the Icelandic Saga-writers followed oral tradition, they may nevertheless be rightly called authors. The choice of words and style, the whole hue of the story and handling of the subject, are their work. Had any other man, for example, put Njal's Saga into shape than he who actually undertook that task, then the Saga would have been quite another thing than it really is. It was granted to few to clothe that story in so fair a garb. The writers of the Icelandic Sagas would therefore have had every right to inscribe their names on the Sagas which they threw into</p>
				<p id="note-preface-7"><a href="#noteref-preface-7">7</a> It will be seen, that in most cases the names of places throughout the Saga have been turned into English, either in whole or in part, as “ Lithend” for “ Hlíðarendi,” and “ Bergthorsknoll” for “ Bergthorshvol.” The translator adopted this course to soften the ruggedness of the original names for the English reader, but in every case the Icelandic name, with its English <a href="#noteref-preface-8">8</a> The following is the title of the original:—" Sagan af Njáli Þorgeirsyni ok sonum hans etcra. Útgefin efter gaumlum</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
